International Sociology
2021, Vol. 36(1) 111–123
© The Author(s) 2020
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0268580920948807
journals.sagepub.com/home/iss
Psychology and politics of
COVID-19 misinfodemics:
Why and how do people
believe in misinfodemics?
Sonia Mukhtar
University of Management and Technology, Lahore, Pakistan
Abstract
Misinfodemics related to COVID-19 have negatively impacted people’s lives, with adverse
health and psycho-sociopolitical outcomes. As the scientific community seeks to communicate
evidence-based information regarding misplaced preventive strategies and misinformed helpseeking behaviors on global multifaceted systems, a secondary risk has emerged: the effects of
misinfodemics on the public. Published articles on PubMed, EMBASE, Google Scholar and Elsevier
about COVID-related misinfodemics have been considered and reviewed in this article. This
review examines the mechanisms, operational structure, prevalence, predictive factors, effects,
responses and potential curtailing strategies of misinfodemics of COVID-19. The present article
shows that the popular variants of COVID-19 misinfodemics could be the joint product of a
psychological predisposition which is either to reject information from experts or perceive the
crisis situation as a product of misinfodemics mechanisms and partisan ideological motivations.
The psychological foundations and political disposition of misinfodemics have implications for the
development of strategies designed to curtail the negative consequences on public health.
Keywords
Conspiracy theories, COVID-19, health communication, misinformation, mistrust in science
The mechanisms of misinfodemics
In this modern era, mainstream and social media have become a primary source of information for people all around the world and thus the risk of misinfodemics surrounding
Corresponding author:
Sonia Mukhtar, University of Management and Technology, C-II Block C 2 Phase 1 Johar Town, Lahore,
Punjab 54770, Pakistan.
Email: sonia.mukhtar12@gmail.com
948807ISS0010.1177/0268580920948807International SociologyMukhtar
research-article2020
Article
112 International Sociology 36(1)
the COVID-19 pandemic is even more challenging to curb. The ongoing coronavirus
(COVID-19) pandemic outbreak has highlighted the interconnectedness of the modern
globalized world where public health threats can extend far beyond their point of origin
due to the unvarying reliance on and misplaced confidence in media platforms. During
lockdown, quarantine, self-isolation and social distancing, virtual communication has
become the major source of interaction (Holman et al., 2020)
The COVID-19 pandemic outbreak has not only escalated the challenges for
healthcare, social, educational, economic, political, environmental, cultural and socioeconomic systems all over the world but also gained momentum in innumerable
misinfodemics mechanisms: rumors, myths, superstitions, conspiracy theories,
claims, hoaxes, false misinformation, fake news, polarization, mistrust in science in
times of crisis, absence of fact checking, misinformation (misleading content, false
context, manipulated data, fabricated material, imposter documents) and disinformation regarding the etiology and outcomes, and misplaced prevention of the disease
(Mukhtar, 2020a; WHO, 2020).
The COVID-19 pandemic outbreak has saturated the mainstream media which disseminate information on a local and global scale. Similarly, social media platforms have
also become an accessible source of (mis)information. Numerous incidents initiated by
these rumors have caused several mishaps across the world. For instance, a man took his
own life after a positive diagnosis of COVID-19 (India), and people have overdosed on
the drug cholorquine after the news about its effectiveness against COVID-19 proliferated (Nigeria) (Busari and Adebayo, 2020; Joe, 2020). There has been a failure to make
a distinction between empirically-based scientific truths and fabricated, unconfirmed
anti-science conspiracy theories among the general public. Such reports reduce the legitimacy of new scientific discoveries regarding a cure or vaccine for COVID-19. This can
also create social stigma, resulting in xenophobia, anti-Chinese sentiment, racism, marginalization, reduced compliance and adherence to quarantine and have adverse health
and psychosocial impacts (Aguilera, 2020; Rana et al., 2020a, 2020b). These considerations become even more exacerbated during lockdown, leading people on the fringe of
popular opinion to spend ever more time on social media. And as people are trying to
make sense of their changed lives, self-proclaimed celebrities, self-identified social
media stars, politicians and the mainstream media’s public figures are propagating their
own subjective interpretations of events in this situation of COVID-19 pandemic (misinfodemics) (Lederer, 2020).
Scientific studies from previous disease outbreaks have demonstrated that misinformation represents a secondary challenge to public health efforts in controlling an epidemic/pandemic (Earnshaw et al., 2019; Kalichman, 2009). Individuals who endorse
misinformation about a disease are less likely to follow public health instructions. During
the Ebola outbreak in 2014, respondents who gave credence to conspiracy theories
alleged that they would be less likely to seek support during the disease outbreak
(National Cancer Institute, 2020). In a 2019 study (Montanaro, 2020) conducted in the
US, over 90% of respondents reported trust in medical healthcare professionals, in contrast to a 2020 study, where the majority of respondents reported mistrust in information
about COVID-19 from the current administration and mainstream media news outlets
(New York Times, 2020).
Mukhtar 113
The psychology of misinfodemics
Fear is an adaptive emotion which serves to mobilize energy towards the potential (actual
or perceived) threat (Mertens et al., 2018). However, when fear is excessive then this
may have detrimental effects on an individual (mental health problems like anxiety and
phobia) and community level (hoarding, panic shopping, xenophobia); when fear is
insufficient then this may also cause harm for both the individual (incompliance and nonadherence towards quarantine and isolation) and community (reckless implementation of
policies that ignores risks to the socioeconomic infrastructure). Likewise, interpersonal
safety measures can mitigate certain threats (transmission of disease) but can paradoxically enhance fear (fear of transmission, excessive health anxiety and psychosocial
issues). Similarly, social safety measures (lockdowns, curfews) help to control the transmission but prolonged and stringent measures could have negative consequences (socioeconomic impact, mental health impact).
Efforts to curb the misinfodemics process have increased because of its adverse
effects on public health communication and to encourage the adoption of sustainable
preventive measures, to manage social and physical distancing, psychological health and
resilience in socioeconomic conditions, and to address stigma, prejudice, discrimination
and inequalities (Mukhtar, 2020b). Among the various factors of psychological vulnerability (Mukhtar, 2020c; Mukhtar and Mahmood, 2018), a propensity to follow popular
opinion, excessive social media presence and a predisposition to anxiety and fear lead to
uncertainty, intolerance, and unpredictability. Coronavirus brings high levels of uncertainty and the inability to cope with uncertainty is exponentially higher causing anxiety,
fear and health-related worry. This situation is exacerbated by the exposure to a plethora
of information (including misinformation and disinformation) about the impending
threat, from mainstream media and social media alike (Rosser, 2019). Perceived threat
information elevates fear, and repeated engagement with trauma-related media content
for several hours daily culminates in acute stress and emotional distress and consequently
will either increase the fear of the virus, or cause insensitivity towards its course.
Identification and monitoring of the internet's ‘centrifugal clarification’ to filter the
accuracy of content has become more challenging as an increasing number of people rely
on social media platforms. One of the challenging problems of misinformation, disinformation and conspiracy theories on social media is the way they emulsify into false,
misleading and click-bait content. The World Health Organization (WHO) launched a
‘mythbuster’ feature on its website as a countermeasure to the spread of unauthentic
news on social media. People who reported the highest media exposure reported higher
acute stress (Holman et al., 2020). Media exposure accumulates ever emerging threats
and repeated exposure to these events increase the symptoms of distress. Worry, fixation,
herd mentality and misplaced conviction make people more vulnerable to media exposure distress.
Alongside the amount of media exposure, the type and content of exposure matters as
well – exposure to tragic events, graphic images, conspiracy theories and violence could
instigate posttraumatic stress and fear of the future which will lead to poor personal
functioning. In recent years, the mainstream media (electronic, print and social media)
have established themselves beyond one government-run channel and the global 
114 International Sociology 36(1)
population has developed an affinity for the news channels in particular. While the older
population mainly relies on more traditional news channels, youth look to social media
such as TikTok, Instagram, YouTube, Twitter, Facebook and WhatsApp. Social media
have become a new conduit for spreading rumors, deliberate misinformation, disinformation, conspiracy theories and personally motivated anecdotes to appeal to followers
and attract attention and create panic (Liang et al., 2020). Some self-proclaimed celebrities and media stars have become so influential that a large number of people rely solely
on their content (Merchant, 2020). Some social media ‘posts’ are circulating on many
platforms and are endorsed by multiple social media account users to encourage optimal
personal functioning, maximum productivity, business-oriented activities, and downplaying the intensity of this traumatic event. Certain posts like ‘if you don’t come out of
this quarantine with a new skill, your side hustle started, more knowledge, then you
never lacked time, you lacked discipline’ circulating on various social media accounts,
prompting people to utilize their time in learning new things and skills, exacerbate the
worry for already anxiety-prone individuals and place psychological pressure to be productive. Rather, messages like ‘if you don’t come out of this quarantine with a new skill,
your side hustle started, more knowledge, then you are doing just fine’ should be disseminated on social media, for individuals to realize that during such an intense traumatic event not everyone is equally endowed with the strength, coping strategies and
problem solving skills to transform trauma into a positive emotion, which is okay and not
a source of shame and guilt.
There is a coercive impression percolating among individuals regarding the lockdown
that people should not assume it is a holiday, but that they must utilize their time productively and engage in occupational or academic activities. This psychological pressure has
further aggravated feelings of guilt, shame, regret, sadness, self-pity, anger, internalized
emotions, being overwhelmed, negative self-talk, unrealistic expectations and a perceived sense of failure (see Mukhtar, 2020a, 2020b). The psychological pressure to compete with peers in achieving a maximum of tasks, producing occupational and academic
outcomes, harnessing a herd of followers and subscribers on one’s media accounts, and
downplaying one’s own trauma and that of others will have devastating effects on mental
wellbeing.
Lockdown resulting in self-isolation, quarantine and social distancing is far removed
from normal leisure time that might be utilized for improved personal functioning – it is a
collective traumatic event which poses a serious threat to people and has resulted in a huge
loss of lives and displacement for many individuals (Mukhtar and Mukhtar, 2020; Mukhtar
and Rana, 2020). COVID-19 is an individual and collective traumatic event and directly or
indirectly has affected every individual in the world. All efforts should be directed towards
minimizing the negative effects of this traumatic COVID-19 pandemic on ‘survivors’.
Many people are going through interpersonal traumatic events in addition to the collective
trauma of COVID-19: domestic violence (gender-based violence), abuse (Mukhtar, 2020d),
financial burden, loneliness, emotional and behavioral problems, grief and bereavement,
fear of losing family, mental health issues, physical injuries or fatalities .
Isolated people facing psychological issues require trauma-focused psychological
support (mental health care, psychological support, guidance, treatment, intervention
and information) such as psychological cyber-counseling, via one’s smartphone for 
Mukhtar 115
instance, and mental health hotlines. Professional help-seeking behaviors should be
encouraged and endorsed and related barriers like stigma, marginalization, discrimination, shaming and phobias should be discouraged through government-driven programs
and evidence-based treatment models.
Emerging pandemics command the intellectual incapacity of decision-making (a
degree of irrationality) when bombarded with conflicting opinions and conspiracy theories and thus the empirical interpretation of origins and impacts result in moral judgments
based on religious and cultural beliefs. The emergence of HIV/AIDS garnered a plethora
of moral judgments orbiting around sexual morality and substance abuse; the arrival of
SARS saw blame directed towards primitive farming practices in Guangzhou; and the
unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic has welcomed a magnitude of misinfodemics on a
multitude of fronts (Ophir, 2018; Richtel, 2020). A psychological predisposition to reject
authorized information through denial as a byproduct of deep founded mistrust, and the
tendency to view major social and political events through conspiracies and partisan motivations as a byproduct of conspiracy thinking are the likely explanatory factors in understanding ‘why’ and ‘who’ believes in COVID-19 misinfodemics. The association between
conspiracy thinking and defense-mechanism denial could be a potential reason for the
refusal of corrective actions in several health-related cases (Carey et al., 2020).
Misinfodemics could be motivated by various factors – an epistemic desire for causal
explanation and subjective certainty, or an existential desire for control and security, or the
social desire to maintain a positive image of the self or group (Douglas et al., 2017).
Stigmatization, labeling, scapegoating and fear swiftly follow with a narrative which
invokes the vernacular of human conflict – waging war against a killer virus, an indomitable invisible threat, an enemy armed with no-vaccine flinging victims in quarantine
camps – losing a sense of proportion and the ability to mitigate fear and use reasonable
knowledge-based measures to challenge and normalize the perceived threat of infection.
The mechanism of misinfodemics is engrossed in silos of public information which is
inept at limiting risks (Wald, 2008), for instance: the social theme focusing on socioeconomic disruption; the scientific theme focusing on medical and health risk communication; and the pandemic theme focusing on state and global response. Populations most
likely to be affected by an emerging disease pandemic and a simultaneous misinfodemics
include those where there is a disproportionally low or inadequate health literacy, disadvantaged socioeconomic groups, migrants, ethnic minorities and vulnerable groups
including older people, people with chronic health conditions and people with disability
(Mukhtar, 2020e; Rowlands et al., 2015).
The politics of coronavirus
Conspiracy theories heavily influenced by geopolitics have spread regarding the origin,
scale, prevention, treatment and self-diagnosis of the disease: of COVID-19 being a viral
bioweapon genetically engineered by a rogue government with a racist and genocidal
agenda to wage an economic and psychological war – the Chinese biological weapon
conspiracy theory (which has spread throughout the United States, United Kingdom,
India and Ukraine), or the US biological weapon conspiracy theory (spread throughout
Russia, Iran, China, the Philippines and Venezuela); a plot by Muslims, or a plot by Jews; 
116 International Sociology 36(1)
espionage; a population control scheme; and medical misinformation (vaccine’s preexistence, cocaine cure, African resistance, 5G, vegetarian immunity and methanol use)
and other views endorsed by presidents, governments and public figures abound, causing
misinfodemics of incorrect information about the virus, etc., which poses risks on a
global scale (McCarthy, 2020).
Meanwhile, COVID-19 could be positively viewed through the partisan lens of
right-wing nationalism and the pandemonium of allegations. Coronavirus is a gift for
the politics of misinfodemics, censorship and pathological nationalism. A multitude of
governments have ‘introduced’ a policy of blame-shifting by launching their powerrivalry statements revolving around illogical reasoning and a narrative of national
immunity towards COVID-19: in the US there are claims of a ‘biological weapon
against the Western world’, ‘Chinese experiment gone wrong’, ‘China as equivalent to
USSR-level threat’ and the most infamous ‘Chinese virus’; Italy has accused migrants
from Africa as the disease carriers to its shores; in France, Hungary and the UK there
is the narration of a correlation between immigrants and coronavirus (reminiscent of
the influx of migrants from war-inflicted countries in 2015 and the so-called border
crisis); European right-wingers declare the ‘enemy has not changed, it is migrants’.
And so the convergence of two crises aggravates mistrust in scientific, political and
economic bodies around the world. These narratives imply through a heavily nuanced
differential discourse that their countries are immune to coronavirus and they would
not have contracted COVID-19, or could manage it effectively, if only for the absence
of immigrants (McCarthy, 2020).
COVID-19 has provided rich fodder for Europe’s nativist populist tune to further
incite the clamor to bar immigrants and building walls/closing borders, to anti-immigration policies. Public opinions are shaped by the landscape of media, scientific bodies and
the frameworks of governments and thus such obstinate prejudice and confrontations
ignite de-globalization, nationalism, nativism, protectionism, tariffs, closed borders and
erection of walls which will intensify the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak.
In Pakistan, a research study conducted by IPSOS revealed that 82% of people in the
country believed that performing ablution will keep them protected from transmitting
coronavirus, and others believed that congregation prayers and shaking hands cannot
infect anyone since it is Sunnah (SAMAA, 2020). Claims circulating about Pakistanis’
resistance to coronavirus were quite prevalent as they were backed by Pakistan’s relatively low mortality rate. These rumors argued that Pakistan’s culture, religion, geographical location and climate made Pakistanis less vulnerable to the virus. In India,
political activists claimed that drinking cow urine and applying cow dung to one’s body
can cure coronavirus; a parliamentarian claimed that saying Namaste instead of Arab
greetings prevents the contraction of coronavirus; an influential film celebrity claimed
that vibrations generated by clapping and blowing conch shells will kill the virus; a selfproclaimed TikTok media star’s claim about eating a poisonous fruit as a preventive
measure hospitalized 11 people; and an ‘anti-coronavirus drug’ and ‘anti-coronavirus
mattress’ have been quite prevalent. For example, a popular myth in various countries is
that home remedies can cure or prevent people from contracting coronavirus. One of
these rumored remedies that has gained traction on social media (with severe, adverse
effects) involves mixing sodium chlorite solution with citric acid, producing chlorine 
Mukhtar 117
dioxide – a powerful bleaching agent – claiming antimicrobial, antiviral and antibacterial
benefits. Similar phenomena were observed all over the world, which may have prolonged the health, psychosocial and economic consequences of COVID-19 among the
general public (Shu et al., 2017).
It becomes more difficult to limit the negative impact of misinfodemics especially when
partisanship can be mobilized in this effort. There could be three strategies to overcome
these negative effects: (a) prevention strategies – to limit the aim and spread of, or exposure to misinfodemics; (b) corrective strategies – founded in scientific and empirical
knowledge to challenge these predispositions, their effects and subsequent belief system
and reduce uncertainty, increase perceived control and promote self-image; (c) collaborative strategies – corrective strategies can be efficacious if other political and social agents
can be activated and mobilized to override partisan, ideological motivations and misinfodemics tendencies. When politics and the media promote misinformation, likeminded individuals exposed to this rhetoric are more likely to follow elite cues and motivated reasoning
and engage with these ideas. Cues from partisan elites have the potential to inflame and
foster misinfodemics as they shape the landscape of information for the general public
(Swire et al., 2017). For instance, at the outset of COVID-19, the American political administration referred to COVID-19 as a ‘new hoax’ (Rieder, 2020) and likened the pandemic to
common flu (Brooks, 2020) or coronavirus as a bioweapon (Stevenson, 2020). This rhetoric is likely to encourage the adoption of related beliefs and lead likeminded supporters to
take the threat less seriously. Media outlets including news personalities and media figures
cast aspersion on the threat of COVID-19 by questioning if hospitals were truly filled with
coronavirus infected patients (Peters, 2020). After the toll on human life became increasingly apparent and unassailable, change in the reporting and behavior on the part of media
and political leaders who had previously (explicitly and unequivocally) trafficked in misinfodemics now hinted at the possibility of misinformation having actually served to correct and prevent negative consequences among the general public.
Animosity, wrapped in hatred inside the hostility
Some media channels initially ran racially labeled and biased headlines on COVID-19, such
as ‘Chinese virus pandemonium’, ‘China kids stay home’, ‘China is the real sick man of
Asia’, ‘Chinese coronavirus’, or ‘kung-flu’, which caused xenophobia and misperceptions,
misled the general public and witnessed a surge in anti-Chinese sentiment and racist-driven
cases against individuals of Chinese origin outside China. Anti-Chinese and anti-Asian xenophobia has been reported in many countries including the US, the UK, Australia and many
European countries. Many Chinese customers were refused entrance into restaurants in
Japan, South Korea, Vietnam and Indonesia (Amnesty International, 2020).
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
issued a statement on Twitter: ‘It’s understandable to be alarmed by #Coronavirus. But
no amount of fear can excuse prejudice & discrimination against people of Asian descent.
Let’s #FightRacism, call out hatred & support each other in this time of a public health
emergency. #StandUp4HumanRights.’
A similar response on Twitter began ‘#JeNeSuisPasUnVirus’ (‘I am not a virus’) after
a French newspaper’s front-page headline, ‘Yellow alert’. Ontario’s Human Rights 
118 International Sociology 36(1)
Commission (OHRC) stated that discrimination is prohibited under the Human Rights
Code (Aguilera, 2020; Ontario Human Rights Commission, 2020).
A government’s dilemma – to be or not to be
At the time of writing, the government of Pakistan under the leadership of Prime Minister
Mr Imran Khan has witnessed a sudden setback, as with the number of cases steadily
increasing their challenge is to curtail the path of the disease in Pakistan. However, there
is a bigger dilemma the government of Pakistan is facing – to be or not to be – partial
lockdown or no lockdown. Either way, this message has a common intention – to minimize the urgency and severity of the pandemic, downplay social isolation measures, disregard the potential crisis in the health sector (while exaggerating the impact on the
economy for the recession that looms on the horizon) and overlook the mitigating measures necessary to stem transmission and medical mistrust among the public (Alwan et al.,
2020; Prem et al., 2020). Religion, politics and business – fundamentally governing
aspects of Pakistan – are opposed to the lockdown and are putting pressure on the government, consequently resulting in the lifting of lockdown. In Pakistan, pandemic or no pandemic, hardline clerics hold the power to override the government’s social-distancing
instructions, put in place in April 2020. Dozens of well-known clerics signed a letter
warning that the government should exempt mosques from the shutdown during the
month of Ramadan or otherwise invite ‘God’s wrath’ (an ulterior narrative insinuating the
political chaos that clerics have unleashed in the past), exercising their religious authority
to gather loyalists to lay siege on the state. The subservient state has already signed an
agreement deferentially promising to abide by the deal, begging the question: who is in
charge of the government during this pandemic crisis – the government or mosques?
Physical and mental health, social and interpersonal factors including intimate partner
violence, marital rape, child abuse, domestic violence, racism, xenophobia, dissociation,
bias, prejudice, stigmatization and marginalization are the least of Pakistani clerics and
mosques’ concerns during this public crisis. Clerics have to protect their two central interests: money and power. Millions of dollars of charitable donations during Ramadan benefit Pakistan’s mosques, which are not under the state’s authority, and clerics who often
partake in political power can challenge the government. Despite all the evidence, a prevalent rhetoric undermining the COVID-19 related risks has been endorsed (and ‘austerely’
followed by the public) at the highest level of authority in Pakistan: the clerics.
Religious misinfodemics is a new branch of clerics’ superciliously propagated doctrine narrated through the lens of pandemic religious-explanation: God could not have
allowed such a disease to emerge and only through rigorous devotion in congregational
prayer can followers of the faith conquer the devil’s machinations in the form of coronavirus; and if anyone tries to halt these efforts then these Zionist agents are the pawns of
evil bent on destroying the faith. This dogmatic doctrine seeps through the ever present,
ever omniscient online media to infiltrate the minds of sheeple-votary-conformists – usually the heads of the household who enforce these maladaptive cognitive twisted patterns
within their families. These instructions dictated by the ‘higher authorities’, and their
adherence, are infringing on individual rights and freedom, planting unquestionable
canon, propagating anti-science and medical mistrust among the public, putting people 
Mukhtar 119
at risk, and halting the emergency control and preventive measures necessary to curb the
pandemic and thus creating public panic, social unrest and distrust in systems (Kalb,
2003; Strong, 1990). These eschewed beliefs can result in adverse behavioral consequences (for instance, failing to administer polio vaccination to one’s children, attributing it as un-Islamic, and contributing to the resurgence of this once eradicated disease in
Pakistan). Misinfodemics, especially those which revolve around science, medicine and
health-related topics, are widespread and prompting people to eschew appropriate healthrelated behaviors (Jolley and Douglas, 2014; Oliver and Wood, 2014).
Potential strategies of curtailment
As research has predicted, there are psychosocial stress and adverse health outcomes for
people in self-isolation, social distancing and quarantine, and this crisis situation will
require remediation from credible sources of information. These include, in the US for
example, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the National Institutes
of Health (NIH), and especially WHO, which has partnered with several social media
platforms and technological companies (Google, LinkedIn, Microsoft, Reddit, Twitter,
Facebook and YouTube) to promote health updates and curb misinformation and disinformation (Hossain et al., 2020). They are seeking to safeguard and ensure effective communication on COVID-19 between healthcare systems and the general public. Despite all
these efforts, infodemics is rampant and multiple misinformation and disinformation
sources are circulating on social media accounts. To address these discrepancies, certain
strategies can be implemented: (a) empirically evidence-based scientific research findings
→ with integration in communication and information technology → to frontline healthcare providers → who communicate with patients and caregivers and populations at risk
→ results in positive health outcomes → and subsequent optimization of resources; (b)
building strategic partnerships (local and global levels) → coordinate connecting offline
and online resources for the communication of uniform information → across all platforms from mass media, community organizations and support groups → to community
and society; (c) contain infodemics of information and disinformation → and disseminate
scientifically evidence-based information → through ‘data-mining algorithms’ to detect
and remove fake news (Shu et al., 2017); (d) those who propagate misinformation
(accountable individuals and online portals) should be identified by local authorities and
law enforcement agencies → precautionary culturally tailored information, translated into
multiple language manuals of factual data regarding COVID-19 should be promoted
through mass media campaigns; and (e) an e-care evidence-based approach and e-services
in local languages (mostly graphic and pictorial for easy understanding) should be made
available → for people with limited access to healthcare, elderly people, rural areas, the
general public in self-isolation and quarantined → to decrease COVID-19 infection.
It is imperative to bring communities and institutional leadership together to promote
transparency and good information governance to control the misinfodemics related to
COVID-19 for both people’s physical, mental and psychosocial health and sound economic, political and systematic functioning during this pandemic (Oliver and Wood, 2014).
The world needs coordinated national and international efforts to apply the scientific
empirical data in local settings to mitigate the grave predicament of lockdown aftereffects 
120 International Sociology 36(1)
and associated issues. Mass media, healthcare organizations, community-based organizations and stakeholders should strategically join in partnership to disseminate, based on
mutual consensus, empirically-based public health messages and remove anti-science
online content through natural language processing and data-mining approaches. The best
global solution for a global disease is international collaboration – the exchange of scientific ideas, health communication and facilitating coordination.



NEW PAPER


Impact of COVID-19 on Psychology among the University
Students
Bablu Kumar Dhar,* Foster Kofi Ayittey, and Sabrina Maria Sarkar
The purpose of the study is to find out the psychological impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on university students. The study focuses on the
university students from different public and private universities of
Bangladesh through a set of questionnaires according to the guideline
of Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7). The result among 15 543
respondents shows that 44.59% are suffering from severe anxiety, 48.41%
moderate anxiety, and only 3.82% mild anxiety. The results highlight that
all epidemic-related stressors are positively correlated with the level of
anxiety. Among the epidemic-related stressors, worry about economic
influences during and after COVID-19 (r = 0.342, p < 0.001) and worry about
the influence of COVID-19 on daily life (r = 0.340, p < 0.001) have a highly
positive impact on the level of anxiety. Following these stressors, worry about
academic delays due to COVID-19 (r = 0.326, p < 0.001) and worry about the
social support during COVID-19 (r = 0.321, p < 0.001) have moderately and
positively correlated with the level of anxiety. The study suggests that proper
government support, as well as social awareness, should be monitored
during epidemics for decreasing anxiety and maintaining a good mental
health of the university students.
1. Introduction
In 2020, the current population density of Bangladesh is 1115.55 
people per square kilometer, which is a 1.01% increase than last 
year. Because of the density of population, Bangladesh is the 
12th most densely populated country in the world.[1]
 According 
to the report of the World Economic Forum, COVID-19 threatens to cause a humanitarian crisis in 
this country. According to the World Bank 
data, in Bangladesh, 15% of workers earn 
more than 500 taka ($5.90) a day and the 
economic shutdown sparked by COVID-19 
endangers millions of livelihoods imminently. The people could meet their 
daily expenditures, sent their children to 
school, and expected that they could save 
money for an emergency health crisis. 
The majority of villagers depend on remittances from the cities or overseas. However, for the current global crisis, people 
are out of work. Income has halted.
Based on the report of the Reuters, the 
COVID-19 pandemic was confirmed to 
have spread to Bangladesh on March 2020 
after recognizing the first three known 
cases reported on March 7, 2020, by the 
Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control 
and Research (IEDCR) of the country.[2]
According to IEDCR, Bangladesh, the 
level of infections remained low at the end 
of March, although there was a precipitous 
rise in April. In the week ending April 16, new cases in Bangladesh grew 1155%, the highest in Asia, ahead of Indonesia with 
186%. As of June 3, 2020, there are a total of 57 563 confirmed 
cases besides 12 161 recovered and 781 death cases.
The novel coronavirus (COVID-2019) is spreading faster all 
over the country. The current situation imposes massive pressure on the government of Bangladesh, the general public, and 
healthcare, and medical providers.[3]
 The pandemic has brought 
not only the danger of death from the epidemiologic contagion but also an intolerable psychological burden to the people 
among the world[4,5]
 and Bangladesh is not out of the problems. The faster spread of the virus; strict isolation measures; 
and delays in starting schools, colleges, and universities across 
the country are anticipated to influence the psychology of university students.[6]
 Psychological reports indicate the influence 
of the epidemic on the children, public, older adults, medical 
staff, and patients.[7–9]
 However, no thorough research on the 
psychology of university students facing the epidemic has been 
conducted to date.
Like other sectors, the education sector has been affected 
severely in Bangladesh. On March 17, 2020, the government 
closed all schools, colleges, and universities when Bangladesh 
had eight confirmed cases. Among 853  267 students out of 
104  universities in Bangladesh, the number of public universities is 33 with 454  530 students, and the number of private 
universities is 71 with 398  737 students. The average student count for a public university is 13  774, and 5616 for a private 
university that indicates that there are 8204 students per university. Having a vast number of undergraduate, graduate, and 
postgraduate students, the country wishes a secure future that 
has been temporary collapsed due to the current pandemic.
For detecting anxiety disorders, the seven-item Generalized 
Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7) is one of the extensively used 
tools that is easy to score and takes less than 1–3 min to finish.[6]
Moreover, the GAD-7 is also applicable for diagnosis, screening, 
and the valuation of the strictness of anxiety disorders, and also 
for panic disorders, stress disorders, post-traumatic disorders, 
and social phobia.[10]
The prior problem of the students of university is mostly 
related to their career and future. Due to the uncertainty, stress 
increases among university students;[11]
 hence, the method of 
supervisory university students during public health crises is 
different and challenging. Therefore, the study aimed to analyze the psychological impact of COVID-19 pandemic among 
university students in Bangladesh. Moreover, the study intends 
to provide suggestions to the government and non-government 
organizations for taking the necessary steps.
2. Results
2.1. Demographic Statistics
Table 1 shows the demographic and particular characteristics 
of the population of the study. The table indicates the 15 543 
university students, most of the respondents are male (66.7%), 
approximately two-thirds of them live in the urban area (76.1%), 
most of their financial status is not steady (61.6%), majority 
of the participants live with their parents (78.1%), and many 
of their relatives or friends are not infected with COVID-19 
(87.4%). However, 12.6% of the relatives or friends of the 
respondents have been infected by the virus.
2.2. Anxiety Level among University Students during the 
Outbreak
Table 2 demonstrates the psychological health of university 
students who have been affected during the epidemic. It is 
shocking to observe that most of the students are at a high 
level of anxiety, and their psychological condition is alarming. 
Among 15 543 students, a very few number of students are in 
normal (3.18%) and mild (3.82%) level of anxiety. However, 
nearly half of the students are at a moderate level of anxiety 
(48.41%), and the rest of them are suffering from very high or 
severe level (44.59%) of anxiety.
2.3. Influencing Factors of Anxiety among University Student 
during the Outbreak
2.3.1. Univariate Analysis
The association between the demographic variables and the 
level of nervousness or anxiety among Bangladeshi university 
students are pointed in Table 3. The analysis shows that all factors have a significant effect on anxiety. During the epidemic, 
gender has a significant effect on anxiety (p < 0.05) and males 
are severely worried (16.88%) than female during the epidemic; 
place of residence in the urban area has a significant impact on 
anxiety and living in the urban area creates moderate anxiety 
(18.79%) than rural areas; living with their parents has a substantial consequence on anxiety and students who live alone 
has amplified anxiety level (p < 0.05). On the other hand, 
financial condition, and the infection of COVID-19 among 
relatives or friends have the most significant effect on anxiety 
(p < 0.001).
2.3.2. Ordinal Regression Analysis
Table 4 points out the consequences of ordinal multivariate 
analysis of related influences with anxiety level through the 
epidemic among the university students of Bangladesh. Significant influences from the univariate analysis comprised in 
the analysis of ordered logistic regression (OLR) in the table. 
The model test indicates that the value of odds ratio (OR) of all 
variables was statistically significant (p < 0.05). Moreover, the 
chi-square test (χ2 = 14.170) of the observed values indicates a 
good model fit. Results from the OLR analysis of the factors 
that influence anxiety level among university students indicate 
that “living in urban areas” causes more anxiety (OR = 1.940; 
CI = 1.830, –2.740); unstable financial condition causes more 
Table 1. Demographic profile of the respondents.
Frequency Percent
Gender
Male 10 395 66.7%
Female 5148 33.3%
Place of residence
Urban 11 880 76.1%
Rural 3663 23.9%
Financial condition
Steady 9504 61.6%
Not steady 6039 38.4%
Living status
Live with parents 12 177 78.1%
Live without parents 3366 21.9%
Relatives or friends infected with COVID-19
Infected 1881 87.4%
Not infected 13 662 12.6%
Table 2. Different anxiety level among the number of university students 
(n = 15 543).
Level of anxiety Number of students Ratio [%]
Normal 495 3.18
Mild 594 3.82
Moderate 7623 48.41
Severe 7326 44.59
Global Challenges 2020, 4, 2000038www.advancedsciencenews.com
2000038 (3 of 5)
www.global-challenges.com
© 2020 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
worry in comparison with stable financial condition (OR = 2.920; 
CI = 1.910, –3.540); living without parents increases nervousness level (OR = 1.270; CI = 0.850, 1.730); and infected relatives 
or friends with novel coronavirus enhance anxiety’s risk factor 
(OR = 3.750; CI = 2.950, –3.980).
2.3.3. Correlation between the Level of Anxiety and 
Epidemic-Related Stressors
Table 5 indicates the result of the correlation analysis between 
the level of anxiety and COVID-19 epidemic-related stressors, 
including worry about economic influences, worry about 
academic delays, worry about the influence of COVID-19 on 
daily life, and worry about the social support during COVID-19. 
The results highlight that all epidemic-related stressors are positively associated with the level of anxiety. Among the epidemicrelated stressors, worry about economic influences during 
and after COVID-19 (r = 0.342, p < 0.001) and worry about the 
influence of COVID-19 on daily life (r = 0.340, p < 0.001) have 
a highly positive impact on the level of anxiety level. Following 
these stressors, worry about academic delays due to COVID-19 
(r = 0.326, p < 0.001) and worry about the social support during 
COVID-19 (r = 0.321, p <  0.001) are moderately and positively 
connected with the level of anxiety.
3. Discussion
According to previous studies, public health emergencies have 
several psychological effects on students who study in higher 
educational institutions. According to Cornine,[12]
 college students’ anxiety is connected to the consequence of the virus. 
Bao et al.[13]
 mentioned that the growing number of infected and 
Table 3. Univariate analysis of anxiety of university students about the outbreak.
Variables Total Level of anxiety Statistics p
Normal Mild Moderate Severe
Gender 0.925b) 0.01
Male 10 395 (33.44) 99 (0.32) 495 (1.59) 4554 (14.65) 5247 (16.88)
Female 5148 (16.56) 0 (0.00) 99 (0.32) 2970 (9.55) 2079 (6.69)
Place of residence 2.922a) 0.002
Urban 11 880 (38.2) 495 (1.59) 495 (1.59) 5841 (18.79) 5049 (16.24)
Rural 3663 (11.8) 0 (0.00) 99 (0.32) 1683 (5.41) 1881 (6.05)
Financial condition 5.420a) <0.001
Steady 9504 (30.57) 297 (0.96) 495 (1.59) 5049 (16.24) 3663 (11.78)
Not steady 6039 (19.43) 198 (0.64) 99 (0.32) 2475 (7.96) 3267 (10.51)
Living with parents 0.970b) 0.012
Yes 12 177 (39.17) 297 (0.96) 396 (1.27) 1386 (4.46) 1584 (5.10)
No 3366 (10.83) 198 (0.64) 198 (0.64) 6318 (19.75) 5346 (17.20)
Relatives/friends infected with COVID-19 7.780b) <0.001
Yes 1881 (6.05) 99 (0.3) 99 (0.4) 891 (2.9) 891 (2.87)
No 13 662 (43.95) 396 (1.3) 495 (1.6) 6633 (21.3) 6039 (19.43)
a)Kruskal-Wallis test; b)Mann-Whitney test.
Table 4. OLR analysis of factors that influence anxiety level among 
students.
Factors Total SE OR p OR (95% CI)
Place of residence
Urban 11 880 0.097 1.940 <0.001 (1.830, 2.740)
Rural 3663 0.076 0.895 0.002 (0.850, 1.110)
Financial condition
Steady 9504 0.070 0.750 0.003 (0.710, 0.920)
Not steady 6039 0.110 2.920 <0.001 (1.910, 3.540)
Living with parents
Yes 12 177 0.160 0.720 0.004 (0.640, 0.771)
No 3366 0.980 1.270 <0.001 (0.850, 1.730)
Relatives/friends infected with COVID-19
Yes 1881 0.150 3.750 <0.001 (2.950, 3.980)
No 13 662 0.060 0.725 0.002 (0.640, 0.810)
SE = Std. Error, OR = Odds ratio, CI = Confidence interval.
Table 5. Analysis of correlation between the epidemic-related stressors 
and university students’ anxiety.
Stressors Anxiety level
r p
Worry about economic influences during and after COVID-19 0.342 <0.001
Worry about academic delays due to COVID-19 0.326 <0.001
Worry about the influence of COVID-19 in daily life 0.340 <0.001
Worry about social support during COVID-19 0.321 <0.001
r = Correlation coefficient.
Global Challenges 2020, 4, 2000038www.advancedsciencenews.com
2000038 (4 of 5)
www.global-challenges.com
© 2020 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
suspected patients has increased anxiety level among students. 
Ayittey et  al.[14,15]
 highlighted the significant scarcity of masks 
and sanitizers, and the devastating, astonishing, and erroneous 
news reports in different social media had increased anxiety 
and fear. The study of Cao et  al.[6]
 pointed that the anxiety 
among college students during the epidemic was related with 
their place of residence, source of parental income, whether 
living with parents, and whether a relative or an acquaintance 
was infected with the epidemic without significant difference 
in gender or region that is dissimilar from the conclusions of 
Moreno et  al.[10]
 Cao et  al.[6]
 concluded that male and female 
students have similar stresses and negative emotions as a 
result of COVID-19. The study of Mei at al.[16]
 indicated fear 
and anxiety. Elmer et al.[17]
 and Wang et al.[18]
 focused on future 
employment. Cornine[12]
 emphasized on infection of relatives 
or friends during the epidemic. Kmietowicz[19]
 and Xiao[5]
 highlighted the psychological condition during long interpersonal 
communication.
The foremost intention of the current study was to assess the 
psychological situation of university students during the current 
epidemic, COVID-19, and to explore the influencing factors of 
their anxiety. The study found that almost 97% of the university 
students were experiencing anxiety due to the outbreak of the 
current epidemic. Among the students who participated, 48.41% 
are suffering from a moderate level of anxiety, and 44.59% are 
experiencing a severe level of anxiety. On the other hand, the 
amount of experiencing a mild level of anxiety (3.82%) and not 
feeling anxiousness (3.18%) is very poor in ratio. This current 
study shows an opposite scenario of the study of Cao et  al.[6]
The study of Cao et  al.[6]
 highlighted the psychological condition of college students of China during COVID-19. The study 
of Cao et al.[6]
 indicated that among Chinese students only 0.9% 
experienced severe anxiety and 21.3% experienced mild anxiety 
during the COVID-19 outbreak.
The economy of urban areas is relatively significant and 
delivers citizens with better safety,[20]
 and living in urban areas 
is a protective factor against anxiety.[6]
 There is indeed an inequity of cultural, economic, and education between rural and 
urban areas. For example, hygienic conditions in urban areas 
are healthier than rural, which reduces the chances of surviving and spreading of COVID-19.[21]
 However, the univariate 
analysis and OLR analysis of factors on the level of anxiety 
among the students of universities in Bangladesh show a different scenario. In explanation, the participants mentioned the 
reason of overdensity among the urban areas in Bangladesh. 
Most of the higher educational institutions are in urban areas. 
Due to the reason, a majority of the students live in urban 
areas and experience immense anxiety during the current 
epidemic.
Living without parents was another favorable factor for 
increasing anxiety among students. The current study also 
finds a similar result regarding this factor with the study of 
Cao et al.[6]
 Earlier studies also have specified that the risk factors connected with anxiety and emotional sicknesses among 
adults comprise not living with parents, parents’ physical and 
psychological problems, and the death of parents in infantile,[22]
which are reliable with the results of the present study.
Financial stability or condition matters much on anxiety 
among the students.[6]
 Elmer et  al.,[17]
 also found that the 
constancy of family income has a significant influence on the 
anxiety level of the university students during the COVID-19 
catastrophe.
Higher levels of stress are connected with young age, having 
to go out to work, female gender, and having an acquaintance infected with COVID-19.[23]
 The contemporary study also 
found that having relatives or friends being infected with novel 
coronavirus becomes a risk factor among university students’ 
anxiety during the epidemic. According to the respondents, it 
generates high contagiousness of the COVID-19.[24]
Economic stressors, academic delays, effects on daily life, 
and families or friends being infected with epidemic are 
positively related to anxiety among the university students of 
Bangladesh during the epidemic. Similar studies by Cao et al.[6]
have specified that along with the national health condition, 
COVID-19 also has a substantial influence on the economy of 
the country as well as individuals.[25]
 Bangladesh remains on 
a knife-edge in COVID-19 crisis. The lockdowns prompted by 
the epidemic has already deteriorated the economic and political stability of the country. Due to the outbreak, many families 
are losing their source of income, and students are feeling worried about paying their tuition fees.[26]
 Hunger, malnutrition, 
and other related problems have augmented in Bangladesh as 
a result of the lockdown.[26]
 Like other countries, all primary, 
secondary schools, high schools, colleges, and universities were 
closed and delaying classes until March 17, 2020, which creates 
more anxiety among students. For reducing anxiety regarding 
this issue, using distant/remote learning methods can be a 
good model. These actions certainly have a precise influence on 
education and the development of students.
Social support is also positively correlated with the anxiety 
of the university students of Bangladesh, which is not consistent with previous findings.[6,7]
 According to the participants of the study, social support lessens the mental pressure 
during the epidemic and changes the attitude regarding social 
support that is rare to find in the society by the students. 
The social support in Bangladesh is not run under a single 
umbrella like the developed countries. Even the supports from 
the government are not well enough.[27]
 This consequence 
indicates that active and vigorous social support is essential 
during public health emergencies to reduce the anxiety level 
among the students.
4. Conclusions
Being burdened with population, Bangladesh becomes one of 
the major risky zones during COVID-19 epidemic where financial, physical, and psychological crisis arise in every moment. 
The overall situation creates a deep psychological impact among 
the university students of Bangladesh. About 97% of university students are in deep anxiety due to the current epidemic. 
Living in urban areas, not having a steady financial situation, 
not living with parents, and infection of relatives or friends in 
epidemic become the severe factors for severe anxiety among 
university students during the outbreak of novel coronavirus. 
The stressors of the COVID-19, including economic stressors, 
academic delays, impact on daily life, and social supports, are 
entirely linked with the symptoms of anxiety levels among 
Global Challenges 2020, 4, 2000038www.advancedsciencenews.com
2000038 (5 of 5)
www.global-challenges.com
© 2020 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
the university students of Bangladesh during the epidemic. 
Though the government of Bangladesh is adopting several 
policies regarding this issue, consciousness and preventive 
measurements of the inhabitants of the country according to 
the guidelines of World Health Organization are needed more 
to resolve the critical problem with high priority. Proper government support, as well as social awareness, should be monitored 
during epidemics to decrease anxiety and maintaining the good 
mental health of the university students for crafting a better 
future of the nation.
5. Experimental Section
Study Population and Sample: For the analysis, the study targeted the 
public and private university students of Bangladesh. The respondents 
were selected randomly from different universities in different cities 
in Bangladesh. By using a structured, reliable, and confidential 
questionnaire, the study tried to measure the psychological health of 
the university students during the COVID-19 outbreak. A total number 
of 15  543 respondents responded (100% response rate) willingly for 
discovering the psychological effect of the COVID-19 pandemic among 
university students in Bangladesh.
Instruments: For finding out the psychological impact on the 
university students of Bangladesh, the study used GAD-7 that comprises 
seven items constructed on seven core symptoms and queries to 
find out the respondents who suffered within the last 2 weeks.[28]
 The 
total score range of the questions was 0–21 followed by a four-point 
Likert scale from 0 to 3 (not at all to almost every day).[6]
 Moreover, 
the study tried to find out the related demographic information of the 
respondents, including gender, place of residence, financial situation, 
living condition, and status of the infection of COVID-19 among their 
relatives or friends. Furthermore, the respondents were queried about 
their thoughts and preventive behaviors, economic conditions, academic 
progress, availability of social support, and influence on daily life 
during the epidemic. The internal consistency (Cronbach’s ɑ) of GAD-7 
is 0.929.
Data Analysis: SPSS (version 25.0) was used to analyze the 
collected data. The study implemented several statistical methods 
to justify the impact of COVID-19 epidemic among the Bangladeshi 
university students, including descriptive statistics to demonstrate 
the demographic features; univariate analysis (nonparametric test) to 
discover the significant relations between sample characteristics and 
anxiety level;[29]
 multivariate logistic regression analyses to determine 
statistical significance among the variables through odds ratio with 95% 
confidence of interval;[6]
 Spearman’s correlation coefficient (r) with a 
two-tailed statistical significance (p < 0.05) to assess the connotation 
between novel coronavirus-related stressors and the level of anxiety.
Ethical Considerations: The department of students’ affairs of different 
universities approved this study. The university authorities also felt 
interested to know the psychological impact of COVID-19 epidemic on 
the students. After describing the need of the study, respondents gave 
their consent voluntarily


NEW PAPER


Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with 
free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the 
company's public news and information website.
Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related 
research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this 
research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other 
publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights 
for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means 
with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are 
granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre 
remains active.Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Asian Journal of Psychiatry
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ajp
Letter to the Editor
Covid-19 lock down: People psychology due to law enforcement
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
COVID-19
Lock down period
Psychological aspects
Law enforcement
In December 2019, an unknown Virus starts affecting the human
being from Wuhan seafood market, China due to trade of various animals and birds viz bats, snakes, birds etc. Though exactly the source of
virus is unknown, the Wuhan Institute of Virology declared that it is 96
% identical to Corona Virus found in bats (Anon, 2020g). Initially, it
was believed that this virus was not a communal spread virus. A lot of
people migrated to Wuhan to celebrate their annual Chunyun festival.
This large get together for the festival, cause the virus to spread among
them. Without knowing this, they started to travelled back to their
places. Due to this, the virus starts affecting more than 200 countries
across the globe.
The World Health Organisation (WHO) declared the virus as Covid –
19. The initial symptoms include fever, cough, breathing difficulties
and when it is severe, results in pneumonia, severe acute respiratory
syndrome and at last result in loss of life (Anon, 2020h). The stage of
spread of virus include 4 stages. In stage 1, the people are affected when
they are travelling to affected countries. In stage 2, the people who are
very closely interacting with the affected people in stage 1 (Anon,
2020e). In stage 3, community spreads occur and still the disease can be
controlled. In stage 4, the massive number of people are affected and it
is very difficult to control.
In India, though the first case of Corona was reported on 29th
January 2020, the virus starts spreading from 1st week of March 2020.
The Government has taken lot of preventive measure to control the
spread of the virus (Anon, 2020a). As the virus spreads due to the closer
interaction of the people the Government asked their citizens to
maintain Social Distancing. In March 22nd a one-day Janata Curfew, a
voluntary self-quarantine activity was observed nationwide. In March
24th, to stop the pandemic and for the welfare of the people, the
Honourable Prime Minister announced the 21 days Lockdown period
and imposed Section 144 of Cr.P.C. throughout the country (Anon,
2020f). By imposing this lockdown, the pandemic can be controlled
adversely without any further consequences. Also, the Government can
disinfect the public areas and allow the hospitals to prepare themselves
to handle this situation. Accordingly, any person who disobeys the rules
would be definitely punished.
1. Enforcement of law
The Constitution of India is considered to be the back bone of the
Government and all other laws laid down by the Government must not
be ultra vires with the constitution (Anon, 2020b). In case any law that
has been laid is ultra vires then it is considered to be unconstitutional
and not valid.
Article 19 of the Constitution of India states about the fundamental
rights of the Citizen, which include freedom of speech, freedom to go
anywhere in the country, form association or unions, gather at a public
place for a cause without any armour etc. but under certain emergency
and critical time there are certain exceptions to the fundamental rights
that are being exercised by the citizens of India, which are stated in
Article 19(2) to Article 19(6). Under this sub clause it is stated that the
state can impose any law for the welfare of the people in emergency
situation for example natural disaster etc. so it is our duty to follow the
rules and restrictions and restrictions that has been imposed.
There is a special act named Epidemic Disease Act 1897. This act
was specifically laid down for such emergency purposes. According to
this act the centre and state has the discretionary powers to take the
control in their hands to stop further spread of the disease or epidemic
or pandemic. Based on this act the centre and state have the power to
quarantine the people affected with any contagious disease or the
people who are suspected to have the symptoms of the contagious
disease. Or even healthy people to protect them from further spread of
the disease.
When the rules imposed by the government in reference to the
epidemic disease act are not followed properly then the Section 188 of
IPC comes into action. According to this section anyone who disobeys
the law imposed (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public
servant) is subjected to one month of imprisonment or fine of INR200 or
both on general conditions. If the person was the reason for the spread
of the disease to a healthy person or death of a person then he is subjected to imprisonment up to 6 months or fine of INR100 or both.
Disaster Management Act 2005 is another act that is related to the
current situation. Under this act Section 51 states the punishment for
the obstruction caused. According to this any person who disobeys the
rule imposed will be given one year of simple imprisonment and if the
person was responsible for any spread of disease or death then is subjected to imprisonment up to 2 years. Section 54 of the same act states
that if any person creates panic situation due to the spreading of false
information by any means e.g.; sharing any information in Social media
is subjected to imprisonment up to 1 year.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2020.102102
Received 12 April 2020
Asian Journal of Psychiatry 51 (2020) 102102
1876-2018/ © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
TAccording to the Section 270 of IPC which applies for a “malignant
act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life”. A violator
can be jailed for up to two years or could be fined or both without bail.
Under Section 271 of IPC if a person is tested positive or suspected
to be affected by the disease and are prescribed to be kept in quarantine
and any person who violates the quarantine rule are booked under this
section and imprisonment up to 2 years which is non cognizable.
According to the Essential Commodities Act, the essential commodities that are said to be the basic needs during the emergency and
disaster time must be sold at the price of MRP or at a reasonable cost
based on demand and requirement but selling the essential things at
unreasonable prices is said to be a crime and is subjected to imprisonment up to 7 years.
2. Psychological aspects of people during lockdown period
Due to lockdown, the psychological aspects of people are affected as
follows:
When the Government announces the India is going to be under
Lockdown in the next 4 h, the general public become panic. There was
an ambiguity among the common public whether the essential items
will be available and they started to buy items that are more than required and tried to store the commodities.
To reduce the fear of the Doctors, Nurses and other Healthcare
Workers the Government has declared Insurance for them. In order to
enhance Healthcare to the Nation, the service of the private Hospitals is
also leveraged. The Government is providing permission to setup more
testing facility to identify the infected people and for providing treatment. The MSME ministry has invited the manufacturer and supplier to
produce Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), Ventilators, Medical
Equipment for the benefit of Healthcare Professionals and Public. Also,
various training programmes were organised for the healthcare professionals to handle the situation.
For the middle-class people, salaried people, organised sector etc.,
the RBI has reduced the repo rate which results in reduction in loan
interest rate. Also, for the term loans, the customer can opt out 3
months EMI. Also, ATM withdraw fee are waived off. Free LPG cylinders, Free rice / wheat, pulses are provided to the beneficiaries. The
deadlines for income tax returns has been extended. For the Small and
Medium Entrepreneurs, collateral free loans will be provided. The GST
filling dates has been extended.
During this lockdown period, the Migrant Workers were not able to
travel to their native place. To Leverage their fear, the Government has
instructed the Employers has to take care of the employees and to
provide them with food and shelter. The Government has instructed to
pay wages during the lockdown period for their employees. However,
three fourths of Indian population are working in unorganised sectors
and this lockdown may results in financial insecurity for them. Also, the
farmers got mentally stressed for the reason where there are no people
for harvesting their goods. The cultivated products like vegetables,
fruits, flowers, species etc cannot be exported to the foreign national
which will affect their economy.
UGC has issued some guidelines to Higher Education Institutes
(HEIs), to take care of the Mental Health, Psychosocial concerns & WellBeing of Students Community during and after COVID-19 outbreak
(Anon, 2020c). To address this challenge, the Teachers undertook the
Socially responsibility. To improvise the quality of teaching, ICT based
teaching-learning were adopted (Anon, 2020d). In order to keep the
Mental Wellness of the people, the National Institute of Mental Healthiness and Neuro Science has launched a toll-free telephone to counsel
the mental illness of people.
3. Conclusion
The corona outbreak is considered to be a pandemic. The Central
and State Government are taking many precautionary measures and
relief measures for the welfare of people. However, there are people
without unaware of the impact of Corona Virus, unnecessarily moving
around the streets. People become panic with the situation and buying
commodities needed without maintaining Social Distancing as advised
by Government. Without the public cooperation the spread of the virus
cannot be controlled. When the Government orders are violated, then
the Government has to strictly enforce the law. Thus, all are advised to
act wisely and cooperate with the Government to safe guard our lives
and the lives of other people.
Present situation conveys that “Law is the only Medicine (Sec.144 of
Cr.P.C.)”
Funding statement
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Contributors
All authors contributed equally
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.



NEW PAPER


fpsyg-12-626934 February 4, 2021 Time: 15:11 # 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 10 February 2021
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.626934
Edited by:
Syed Ghulam Meran Shah,
University of the Punjab, Pakistan
Reviewed by:
Zeying Li,
Guangdong University of Technology,
China
Sohail Ahmad Javeed,
Nanjing Agricultural University, China
*Correspondence:
Muhammad Mohsin
mohsinlatifntu@gmail.com
Kun Penglai
ruhiyyih@163.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Organizational Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 07 November 2020
Accepted: 04 January 2021
Published: 10 February 2021
Citation:
Naseem S, Mohsin M, Hui W,
Liyan G and Penglai K (2021) The
Investor Psychology and Stock
Market Behavior During the Initial Era
of COVID-19: A Study of China,
Japan, and the United States.
Front. Psychol. 12:626934.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.626934
The Investor Psychology and Stock
Market Behavior During the Initial
Era of COVID-19: A Study of China,
Japan, and the United States
Sobia Naseem1
, Muhammad Mohsin2
*, Wang Hui1
, Geng Liyan1 and Kun Penglai1
*
1 School of Economics and Management, Shijiazhuang Tiedao University, Shijiazhuang, China, 2 School of Business, Hunan
University of Humanities, Science and Technology, Loudi, China
A highly transmittable and pathogenic viral infection, COVID-19, has dramatically
changed the world with a tragically large number of human lives being lost. The epidemic
has created psychological resilience and unbearable psychological pressure among
patients and health professionals. The objective of this study is to analyze investor
psychology and stock market behavior during COVID-19. The psychological behavior of
investors, whether positive or negative, toward the stock market can change the picture
of the economy. This research explores Shanghai, Nikkei 225, and Dow Jones stock
markets from January 20, 2020, to April 27, 2020, by employing principal component
analysis. The results showed that investor psychology was negatively related to three
selected stock markets under psychological resilience and pandemic pressure. The
negative emotions and pessimism urge investors to cease financial investment in the
stock market, and consequently, the stock market returns decreased. In a deadly
pandemic, the masses were more concerned about their lives and livelihood and less
about wealth and leisure. This research contributes to the literature gap of investors’
psychological behavior during a pandemic outbreak. The study suggests that policymakers should design a plan to fight against COVID-19. The government should
manage the health sector’s budget to overcome future crises.
Keywords: COVID-19, investor psychology, stock market behavior, financial sustainability, masses psychology
INTRODUCTION
The terminology of “Corona” is not newly invented in science. This single-stranded RNA
virus’ primary roots were observed in 1960, belonging to the Corona viridae family in the
order Nidovirales (Galante et al., 2016; Kanwar et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2020; Mohsin et al.,
2020b). The taxonomic naming comes from the virus’ structure, which gives the appearance
of crown-like spikes on the virus’ outer surface (Azam et al., 2020; Sarfraz et al., 2020c;
Shereen et al., 2020). The prey of the first coronavirus species was chicken and pig; there
was no human–human transmission. From 1960 to 2020, different allied versions of the
same family of viruses have been observed: the common cold in adults (COV 229E and
COV OC43 in mid-1960); severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2003);
human coronavirus with common cold, bronchitis, and asthma; chronic obstructive pulmonary
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 February 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 626934fpsyg-12-626934 February 4, 2021 Time: 15:11 # 2
Naseem et al. Investor Psychology and Stock Market Behavior
disease (COPD) exacerbations; pneumonia (HCOV NL63-2004
and CoV-HKU1); Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS
CoV-2012); and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus19 (SARS-CoV-2019 or SARS-CoV-2), displaying unmatched
intensity and severity compared to the previous species of corona
(Van Der Hoek et al., 2004; Kahn and McIntosh, 2005; Woo
et al., 2005; Esper et al., 2006; Zaki et al., 2012). At the start
of the virus breakout, the virus name was 2019-nCOV as per
the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV),
and the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(CCDC) changed it into SARS-CoV-2 on January 7, 2020 due to
its structure and symptoms. COVID-19 was first discovered in
Wuhan’s wet market, Hubei Province, China, in early December
2019, and this aroused global attention in late January 2020.
The virus has been spreading exponentially, using human-tohuman transmission through respiratory droplets, i.e., sneezing
and coughing (Azam et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Sarfraz et al.,
2020a; Shereen et al., 2020). During this incubation period,
researchers focused on exploring, preventing, and treating
patients. Still, the pandemic’s psychological impact is the other
side of the disease (mental illness). The global quarantine
announcement has sparked several concerns: fear of separation
from family, fear of illness and death, avoidance of medical
facilities due to threat of infection, fear of unemployment, the
threat of racism against people who live in or are perceived
to be from the affected areas, fear of losing near and dear
ones because of the virus, maintained space from minors
and disabled or elderly family members due to infection,
isolation, and recalling the severity of the treatment of infected
people. These have become originators of anxiety, stress, and
grave concern globally. These mental health aspects of the
COVID-19 outbreak have affected individual lives as well as the
financial markets.
Human Psychology and COVID-19
The current pandemic of SARS-CoV-2 has seriously influenced
human psychology through a notable mental state of “anxiety.”
The term “anxiety” covers the population’s reaction toward the
epidemic to all media, whether the information is authentic
or erroneous, e.g., inappropriate behavior of people concerning
the abandonment of animals and panic buying of other foods.
The panic attacks are not properly defined without linkage to
anxiety disorder in the medical sense. Anxiety is a combination
of different psychiatric disorders both internal (phobias, panic
attacks, and panic disorder) and external (worry, stress, fear,
painful experiences, or events). The psychological effect of
COVID-19’ has led to mass hysteria, post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD), panic attacks, obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD), and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). The behavioral
immune system (BIS) theory, stress theory, and perceived risk
theory explain that negative emotion (anxiety, aversion) and
negative cognitive assessment of human beings are developed
for self-protection. People tend to develop avoidant behavior
and strictly follow the social norms due to the pandemic’s
severe effects and the potential threat of disease (Cao et al.,
2020; Lai et al., 2020; Sarfraz et al., 2020b). The anxiety, stress,
and panic attacks of people due to COVID-19 have created
two etiologies. The first is the identification of symptoms of
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), such as cough
and dyspnea, at high frequency (Preter and Klein, 2008;
Javelot and Weiner, 2020). The second one is “false alarming”
(Klein, 1993) as a psychopathological link to the catastrophic
FIGURE 1 | Impact of COVID-19 on stock markets: Source Bloomberg.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 February 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 626934fpsyg-12-626934 February 4, 2021 Time: 15:11 # 3
Naseem et al. Investor Psychology and Stock Market Behavior
TABLE 1 | Principle component analysis (PCA) of the variables (China).
The Eigenvalues Number Value Difference Proportion Cumulative value Cumulative proportion
Eigenvalues: (Sum = 5, Average = 1) 1 2.0545 0.4404 0.4109 2.0545 0.4109
2 1.6141 0.7071 0.3228 3.6686 0.7337
3 0.9070 0.5014 0.1814 4.5757 0.9151
4 0.4057 0.3870 0.0811 4.9813 0.9963
5 0.0187 – 0.0037 5 1
Source: Author’s calculation.
interpretation of physiological sensation (respiration rate). The
recurrence of panic attacks has increased the respiration rate
and has become the reason for excessively avoidant behaviors
and blind conformity (Li et al., 2020; Mohsin et al., 2020a).
Psychopathology is a keen concern for this study because it has
an intense effect on investor behavior. Stock market investors
and business people generally spend most of their time in the
workplace. However, they are currently mostly homebound;
the present situation of the stock markets, investment decision
pressure, and family members’ psychological health now put
pressure on investor psychology.
Investors’ Psychology (Sentiments),
Stock Market, and COVID-19
The COVID-19 outbreak has threatened every individual
field of life to influence public health. The sustainability of
the global stock market and financial markets also carries
significant repercussions (Ali et al., 2020; Huang and Zheng,
2020). Being a part of the societal system, investor psychology
(sentiments) and their optimism or pessimism about future stock
prices can also change. A sharp decrease has been observed
in Shanghai, Dow Jones, and Nikkei’s stock prices due to
investor sentiment volatility during the pandemic outbreak (see
Figure 1). The visual presentation of Figure 1 has shown a
sudden downward trend in stock markets after the outbreak
of the pandemic.
Existing literature has focused on the relationship between
stock prices and investor sentiment. Lee et al. (2002) and Brown
and Cliff (2004) explained that the past market returns are
important sentiment determinants, while investor sentiment
changes significantly correlated with the contemporary
market return. The positive relationship between stock
markets and sentiment will confirm that investor sentiment
is a contrarian predictor for consequent market returns.
Meanwhile, the sentiment impact is stronger if easy (hard)
to value stocks are negatively (positively) influenced by
sentiments (Baker and Wurgler, 2007; Xiang et al., 2020).
Using the component of market index return, which is
avoidant of fundamental macroeconomic factors, Lan et al.
(2020) observed robust evidence that the pre-announcement
abnormal return derives from investor sentiment. The sentiment
determined overvaluation corrects within 1 month in the postannouncement period. The market timers tackle this sentiment
situation and take advantage of issuing season shares. The
stock price sensitivity in terms of the good news of earning is
higher during a high sentiment period. In contrast, in a low
sentiment period, the stock price sensitivity behaves negatively.
As per analysis suggestions, the investor sentiment becomes
the reason for the general mispricing of stock because of
sentient-driven mispricing of earning contributions (Schmeling,
2009; Zouaoui et al., 2011; Mian and Sankaraguruswamy, 2012;
Cheema et al., 2020). The high market competition indicated
that sentiments and returns are positively related to each other,
and this relationship disappears in low market competition.
Although the financial crisis changes the situation irrespective
of market competition, a positive relationship exists between
sentiments and returns (Ryu et al., 2020). Investors can accept
psychological pressure more sensitively and intensively than
the lay person. Apart from the pandemic’s rapid spread, the
financial news, media, and amplifiers have worked as fear
spreaders about COVID-19. Tetlock (2007) elucidated that
spread of news about the stock market strongly affects investor
psychology and sociology. The high media pessimism leads to
downward pressure on market prices and vice versa. The investor
sentiment theory also confirmed the consistent relationship
between media content and individual investor behavior with
disproportionately small stocks. This research is based on a
new ideology of investor psychology and the stock market
during the pandemic. There have been few studies in this area,
but a bulk of research centers on both human psychology
and COVID-19 as well as the stock market and COVID-19.
Under the caption of investor psychology, the stock market,
and COVID-19, we tried to explain this research’s nature
and relationship.
The psychological pressure negatively impacts investors and
investing decisions, which can decline any individual country’s
economy. This study analyzed investor psychology and stock
market behavior during COVID-19—a comparatively new debate
about COVID-19. This research will contribute to the existing
literature and open up new dimensions in understanding
investor sentiment toward investment decisions in the stock
TABLE 2 | The eigen vector loadings (Japan).
Variable PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 PC 4 PC 5
STURN −0.0584 0.6588 −0.3581 0.6589 −0.0114
MFI 0.1759 0.6664 −0.1181 −0.7143 0.0283
RSI −0.1244 0.3472 0.9187 0.1411 −0.0067
1CC 0.6881 −0.0323 0.0870 0.1528 0.7033
1CD 0.6904 −0.0193 0.0786 0.1109 −0.7102
Source: Author’s calculation.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 February 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 626934fpsyg-12-626934 February 4, 2021 Time: 15:11 # 4
Naseem et al. Investor Psychology and Stock Market Behavior
FIGURE 2 | Relationship between Shanghai stock returns and created Sentiment Index.
market under special circumstances during the outbreak of
pandemics and times of intense anxiety. Our research differs
from previous studies in the use of proxies of investor
sentiment as indicators of the stock market and COVID-19.
The strong theoretical upbringing of psychological behavior and
the dynamic process of stock price fluctuation will deepen the
understanding of readers, investors, and researchers. A sample
of three different stock markets will help elaborate on investors’
psychological and geographical sensation during investment
decisions in a pandemic.
DATA DESCRIPTION AND
METHODOLOGY
Data Description
Our research includes daily observations of three different stock
markets, i.e., Shanghai stock market, Nikkei, and Dow Jones,
from January 20 to April 27, 2020. The market selection is based
on two reasons. The first is the impact of COVID-19 on investor
sentiment during the pandemic, i.e., the Shanghai Stock Market
(China). The second is to check the global impact by using Nikkei
and Dow Jones. The reason behind the selected data span is the
global spread of COVID-19. The sample period starts from the
data declaration of all sample markets because the synchronized
data lead to accurate results. The data are collected from stock
markets in China, Japan, and the United States. The analyzed data
are secondary and publically available on mentioned databases,
i.e., Bloomberg for stock markets data and WHO for COVID-19.
Methodology
The Sentiment Index (SMI) model used in this research is
presented below:
SMIm,t,i = α1STURN + α2MFI + α3RSI
+α41CC + α51CD + εt (1)
TABLE 3 | Ordinary correlations (United States).
STURN MFI RSI 1CC 1CD
STURN 1
MFI 0.5348 1
RSI 0.1233 0.1892 1
1CC −0.1045 0.1607 −0.1127 1
1CD −0.0991 0.1878 −0.1153 0.8018 1
Source: Author’s calculation.
In eq. 1, SMIm,t
indicates the first principal component estimated
by eq. 1’s linear combination of the standardized variables.
Stock exchange turnover ratio (STURN) is the turnover of the
respective stock exchange, MFI is the Money Flow Index, RSI is
the Relative Strength Index, 1 CC is the change in daily confirm
cases, and 1 CD is the daily confirmed deaths.
Stock Exchange Turnover Ratio
The stock market’s trading activity can be measured by turnover
ratio; subsequently, it is used in the primary measurement model.
Ying (1966) and Rehman et al. (2017) have explained that more
considerable turnover is an indication of a rise in stock prices
(Bullish Market), while small turnover reflects a fall in stock
prices (Bearish Market). The stock exchange turnover ratio is
calculated by using the following equation:
STURN = 100 ×
VMDaily
VMMonthly
(2)
where VMDaily is used for daily volume, VMMonthly is the average
volume of the month, and STURN is calculated using a running
or moving basis, which means the previous dropping value and
adding the next one.
Money Flow Index
The MFI comprises daily stock prices and turnover information.
An increase in money flow indicates the market trend. The
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 February 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 626934fpsyg-12-626934 February 4, 2021 Time: 15:11 # 5
Naseem et al. Investor Psychology and Stock Market Behavior
TABLE 4 | Principle component analysis (PCA) of the variables (China).
The eigenvalues Number Value Difference Proportion Cumulative value Cumulative proportion
Eigenvalues: (Sum = 5, Average = 1) 1 1.8735 0.6057 0.3747 1.8735 0.3747
2 1.2678 0.3853 0.2536 3.1413 0.6283
3 0.8825 0.0721 0.1765 4.0238 0.8048
4 0.8104 0.6446 0.1621 4.8342 0.9668
5 0.1658 – 0.0332 5 1
Source: Author’s calculation.
rising trend in the MFI increases the buying pressure,
whereas the rise in the falling trend increases the selling
pressure. The following formula is used to calculate
the MFI:
Daily Prices =
Low + High + Close
3
(3)
Money Flow = Daily Prices × Turnover (4)
When the current day price is higher than the previous day,
the money flow is positive, while there is a comparatively
lower current day price than the previous day, the money
flow is negative (Tolonen, 2011; Wang et al., 2015; Marek
and Marková, 2020). The daily MFI has been calculated as
follows:
MFI =
100 ×
Positive Money FlowDaily
Positive Money FlowDaily + Negative Money FlowDaily
(5)
Relative Strength Index
The technical analysis used the RSI, a momentum indicator that
measures the magnitude of recent price changes, to evaluate
the oversold or overbought condition in stock or other asset
prices (Russell, 1978; Wilder, 1978; Russell and Franzmann,
1979; Ivascu and Cioca, 2019). An oscillator is a display board
of RSI between two extremes (low and high with a range
of 0–100). Suppose the oscillator shows an upward trend
with RSI ≥ 70 value, meaning that a security is overbought
or overvalued. In that case, a positive but downward trend
with RSI ≤ 30 value indicates an oversold or undervalued
condition.
RSIDaily = 100 ×
6(Pt,i − Pt−1,i)+
6

Pt,i − Pt−1,i


(6)
(Pt,i − Pt−1,i)+ =

Pt,i − Pt−1,i


if Pt,i − Pt−1,i > 0, otherwise Pt,i − Pt−1,i = 0
Change in Daily Confirmed and Death Cases
The changes in daily confirmed and death cases of COVID19 are used to capture investor mood swings regarding
the spreading pandemic. This term was used by Chen
et al. (2010, 2014) to check the impact of market index
TABLE 5 | The eigen vector loadings (Japan).
Variable PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 PC 4 PC 5
STURN 0.6844 −0.1151 −0.1598 −0.0468 0.7005
MFI −0.1786 0.6863 0.3105 −0.5451 0.3217
RSI −0.6003 −0.3142 0.2582 0.3109 0.6145
1CC −0.1380 0.5865 −0.5755 0.5360 0.1357
1CD 0.3469 0.2702 0.6929 0.5628 −0.0989
Source: Author’s calculation.
change on investor mood. The changes in daily confirmed
cases and daily death cases are calculated as follows:
1CC = CCt − CCt−1,i (7)
1CD = CDt − CDt−1,i (8)
Relationship Between Stock Market Index and
Investor Sentiment
The SMI regressed on the stock market volatility series during
COVID-19. The following regression equation checks the
respective sentiment and market return relationship:
Ym,t−1,i = α + βlnSMIm,t−1,i (9)
Ym,t−1 is the market return of the stock market’s indicator
concerning time, while SMIm,t−1,i
is the Sentiment Index. The
calculation of Ym,t−1 is done by the following equation:
Rm,t,i = 100 ∗ Log 
Pt
Pt−1

(10)
In this equation, Pt
is the current market price (closing), and Pt−1
is the preceding market price (closing).
RESULTS
Principle Component Analysis
The principle component analysis (PCA) is employed to extract
meaningful information from multivariate data (orthogonal
linear transformation) and present the information in the form
of a set of new variables by use of scalar projections, which are
called principal components (PC). The total number of PCs is
less than or equal to the original number of variables. That is
why the new variables or PCs are known as a linear combination
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 February 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 626934fpsyg-12-626934 February 4, 2021 Time: 15:11 # 6
Naseem et al. Investor Psychology and Stock Market Behavior
FIGURE 3 | Relationship between Nikkei 225 market returns and created Sentiment Index.
of actual variables. The PCs are used as direction identifiers and
correspond to the total variation of the data set. The multivariate
data dimensionality reduces by using PCA with minimal loss of
information. The eigenvalues explained that every PC retains the
amount of variation. The division of variation between PCs as
the eigenvalues is large for first PCs and small for subsequent
ones. The first PC, or the PC with more than one eigenvalue, was
used to check the correlation because of the increased variation
retention of the data set.
Shanghai Stock Market
The principal component analysis of the selected variable for the
Shanghai Stock Market is presented in Tables 1, 2. According to
Kaiser Criterion, the principle component with an eigenvalue not
less than 1 will be used (Yeomans and Golder, 1982; Braeken
and Van Assen, 2017; Rehman et al., 2017). The eigenvalue of
PC-1 is 2.0545, which meets the criteria of maximal variation.
The numeric presentation of PC-1 shows 41.09% of the Shanghai
Stock Market relationship, which is the highest value compared
to other principal components. The following index was created
by using the first principle component:
SMISSE,t = −0.0584STURN + 0.1759MFI + −0.1244RSI +
0.68811CC + 0.69041CD
The relationship between Shanghai stock returns and the
created SMI is graphically presented in Figure 2.
The correlation matrix results are displayed in Table 3, which
is employed to check the multicollinearity among independent
variables. The multicollinearity check is essential for the accuracy
of results because inter-correlation among independent variables
in a multiple regression model can mislead the results. When
the regressor shows a value of more than 0.80, then the data
series shows multicollinearity. The correlation matrix range for
the Shanghai Stock Market is from −0.0991 to 0.8018, ensuring
the data series is free from multicollinearity.
TABLE 6 | Ordinary correlations (United States).
STURN MFI RSI 1CC 1CD
STURN 1
MFI 0.5349 1
RSI 0.1234 0.1892 1
1CC −0.1045 0.1607 −0.1128 1
1CD −0.0991 0.1878 −0.1154 0.8008 1
Source: Author’s calculation.
Nikkei 225 Stock Market
The PCA of the selected variable for the Nikkei 225 stock market
is presented in Tables 4, 5. According to Kaiser Criterion, the
principle component with an eigenvalue not less than 1 will be
used (Yeomans and Golder, 1982; Braeken and Van Assen, 2017;
Rehman et al., 2017). The eigenvalue of PC-1 for the Nikkei
225 stock market is 1.8735, which captures maximum variation
and gets the full support of Kaiser Criterion. The cumulative
proportion value of PC-1 shows 37.47% of the Nikkei 225 stock
market relationship with a set of selected variables. The following
index was created by using the first principle component:
SMIN225,t = 0.6844STURN + −0.1786MFI + −0.6003RSI
+ − 0.13801CC + 0.34691CD
The relationship of Shanghai stock returns and created SMI is
graphically presented in Figure 3.
The correlation matrix results are displayed in Table 6, which
is employed to check the multicollinearity among independent
variables. The range of correlation matrix for the Nikkei 225
stock market is between −0.0991 and 0.8008, which rejects the
existence of multicollinearity.
Dow Jones Stock Market
The PCA of the selected variable for the Dow Jones stock market
is presented in Tables 7, 8. The eigenvalue of PC-1 is 1.7291,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 February 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 626934fpsyg-12-626934 February 4, 2021 Time: 15:11 # 7
Naseem et al. Investor Psychology and Stock Market Behavior
TABLE 7 | Principle component analysis (PCA) of the variables (China).
Number Value Difference Proportion Cumulative value Cumulative proportion
The eigenvalues
Eigenvalues: (Sum = 5, Average = 1) 1 1.7291 0.2446 0.3458 1.7291 0.3458
2 1.4845 0.7252 0.2969 3.2136 0.6427
3 0.7594 0.0917 0.1519 3.9730 0.7946
4 0.6677 0.3083 0.1335 4.6406 0.9281
5 0.3594 – 0.0719 5 1
Source: Author’s calculation.
TABLE 8 | The eigen vector loadings (Japan).
Variable PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 PC 4 PC 5
STURN −0.2275 0.5515 0.6948 0.3344 0.2226
MFI −0.1650 0.5628 −0.6981 0.4107 −0.0009
RSI −0.1960 −0.5985 0.0193 0.7743 0.0590
1CC 0.6798 0.0110 −0.0776 0.1278 0.7179
1CD 0.6484 0.1443 0.1534 0.3219 −0.6570
Source: Author’s calculation.
which captures maximum variation and gets the full support
of Kaiser Criterion (Yeomans and Golder, 1982; Cioca et al.,
2014; Braeken and Van Assen, 2017; Rehman et al., 2017). The
cumulative proportion value of PC-1 shows 34.58% of the Dow
Jones stock market relationship with chosen variables, which is
the highest value among all principal components. The following
index was created using the first principle component:
SMIDJ,t = −0.2275STURN + −0.1650MFI − 0.1960RSI
+0.67981CC + 0.64841CD
The relationship between Dow Jones stock returns and the
created SMI is graphically presented in Figure 4.
The correlation matrix results are displayed in Table 9, which
is employed to check the multicollinearity among independent
variables. The importance of multicollinearity is observed
because inter-correlation among independent variables in a
multiple regression model can betray the results. The range of
the correlation matrix for the Dow Jones stock market is from
−0.0367 to 0.6135, which guarantees the data series free from
multicollinearity.
The regression results are presented in Table 10, which
shows the coefficient (β) −0.2532, −0.2532, and −0.0264 as the
value of the SMI with 0.0056, 0.0056, and 0.0000 probability
values for Shanghai, Nikkei 225, and Dow Jones stock markets,
respectively. According to this study, the SMI is negative and
significantly related to stock returns at a 1% level of significance
(Baker and Wurgler, 2007; Chen et al., 2014). The importance
of SMI explicated that investor sentiments are strongly affected
by volatility and investment decision of the stock market during
the pandemic. The results have also shown the negative impact of
COVID-19 on investor sentiment and stock market returns. The
spreading pandemic disturbs the general public’s daily routines
and interrupts stock markets, financial markets, and investor
psychology toward investment decisions.
DISCUSSION
After the pandemic outbreak and the WHO’s classification of it
as a public health emergency, investors’ psychological pressure
FIGURE 4 | Relationship between Dow Jones stock market returns and created Sentiment Index.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 February 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 626934fpsyg-12-626934 February 4, 2021 Time: 15:11 # 8
Naseem et al. Investor Psychology and Stock Market Behavior
TABLE 9 | Ordinary correlations (United States).
STURN MFI RSI 1CC 1CD
STURN 1
MFI 0.2490 1
RSI −0.2251 −0.2420 1
1CC −0.2134 −0.1088 −0.1600 1
1CD −0.0367 −0.0572 −0.1932 0.6135 1
Source: Author’s calculation.
TABLE 10 | The relationship between stock exchange and Sentiment Index
during COVID-19.
α (consent) β
Shanghai stock exchange
SMI (Sentiment Index) −0.9453 −0.2532*
Prob. 0.0079 0.0056
T-statistic [−2.7388] [−2.8627]
Nikkei 225
SMI (Sentiment Index) −0.9453 −0.2532*
Prob. 0.0079 0.0056
T-statistic [−2.7388] [−2.8627]
Dow Jones
SMI (Sentiment Index) 8.6546 −0.0264*
Prob. 0.0000 0.0000
T-statistic [117.3315] [−6.5732]
*Shows 1% level of significance.
Source: Author’s calculation.
and response showed a downward trend in stock markets. The
sudden reduction in Shanghai (1.6%), Dow and Jones (9.5%),
and Nikkei (10.6%) can be observed in Figure 1. The numerical
facts of stock markets are collected from Bloomberg’s official
site, and the investor sentiment is generated using different
proxies. The selected proxies represent different circumstances
that might be affected the psychological behavior and decision
power of investors. In this research, daily data of stock markets
and increase in COVID-19 (death and confirmed cases) are
used, accurately covering investors’ daily psychological pressure.
The PCA is employed due to its useful features: correlation
removal, improved algorithm performance, repaired overfitting
among variables, and reduction of high dimensions into low
dimensions for clear visualization of every single component. The
research results elucidated a negative and significant relationship
between investor psychology and investment decision under
pandemic outbreaks for all selected markets. The stock market
movement along the investor SMI in Figures 2–4 has shown
the beneficial relationship between investor psychology and
stock market returns. The investors or business people were
generally outbound for 10–15 h per day. During pandemic,
however, they were homebound, which affected their psychology
adversely. This research provides some precautionary measures
for releasing the pandemic and investment pressure. Investors
should adopt behavior therapy—home-based relaxation exercises
to control their anxiety and depression. The small-scale version
of their official stock market setup should be established in their
homes, and visits to the offices should be reduced. The global
paramedical staff and scientists are continually struggling to
elucidate the vaccines. Until they succeed, everyone should follow
the precautions, i.e., wearing a mask, sanitizing, and maintaining
distance in workplaces and the like. The less psychological control
or pressure can help investors invest money and keep stock
markets and economies on track.
CONCLUSION
The origin of the current “COVID-19” pandemic is considered
to be the wet market of Hunan, Hubei Province, China. Within
1 month from its evolution, COVID-19 has spread to 109
countries, and the pandemic has gained intense global attention.
The sudden outbreak of the pandemic and the rapid increase of
its spread have left a significant impact on human physiology and
psychology. The psychological effect disrupts the psychology of
the general public and investor psychology toward stock market
investment decisions. The increasing number of cases and deaths
worldwide due to COVID-19 has made the economic situation
more uncertain and unpredictable. A sudden and dramatic
downward trend in financial markets is observed in Chinese
and global financial markets, such as Shanghai, Nikkei 225,
and Dow Jones, which are down by −1.6, 10.6, and −9.5%
points, respectively. There are no promising clinical treatments
or prevention strategies developed against COVID-19 until now,
threatening human psychology. At the same time, healthcare
workers are searching for a solution to the question of vaccination
against COVID-19 and psychiatrist-designed psycho-therapeutic
strategies to cope with the threat, stress, and anxiety of the
pandemic, which have a devastating effect on daily life.
This research paper examined the relationship between the
stock market and investor psychology regarding stock market
investment decisions during the pandemic. By employing PCA,
this research observed a downward trend in stock markets
and the pandemic’s negative impact on investor sentiment.
This investigation confirmed the economic crises in the
Shanghai, Nikkei 225, and Dow Jones stock markets during
the pandemic. The results have pointed out that the threat of
health strongly affected the psychology of investors. The created
SMI behaved negatively with a significance of 1% for three
selected markets. The three selected markets represented three
different world areas with diverse geographical backgrounds,
financial positions, cultures, resources, and traditions to check
global investor behavior. The significant relationship between
the SMI and the stock market during a pandemic confirmed
that the behavior of almost every nation fighting COVID-19
and investor financial behavior is the same across China and
other developed countries. This study concluded that health
crises and psychological disorders among the general public affect
the economic condition and financial position of individual and
global investors.
Limitations and Suggestions
The pandemic is still under discussion, and healthcare workers
are trying to find a solution to the issue of vaccination. It is
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 February 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 626934fpsyg-12-626934 February 4, 2021 Time: 15:11 # 9
Naseem et al. Investor Psychology and Stock Market Behavior
doubtlessly tough to run global systems, such as the stock market,
from the workers’ individual homes, but to stop working due
to anxiety or psychological threat is also not the solution to
the problem. Investor sentiment creates tremendous uncertainty
for stock markets and commensurate with a potential crisis of
scale and speed. The governments and policy-makers should
have to set some domestic and international policies for this
unpredictable situation for workplaces. The pandemic is a
worldwide issue, but the courageous actions of governments,
global citizens, policy-makers, healthcare workers, scientists, and
investors can enable us to overcome this global crisis.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and
intellectual contribution to the work, and approved it
for publication.


NEW PAPER


Sport psychology services to professional athletes:
working through COVID-19
Robert Schinke, Athanasios Papaioannou, Charles Maher, William D.
Parham, Carsten Hvid Larsen, Richard Gordin & Stewart Cotterill
To cite this article: Robert Schinke, Athanasios Papaioannou, Charles Maher, William D. Parham,
Carsten Hvid Larsen, Richard Gordin & Stewart Cotterill (2020) Sport psychology services to
professional athletes: working through COVID-19, International Journal of Sport and Exercis
Sport psychology services to professional athletes: working
through COVID-19
Fandom around the world yearns for sports entertainment. Much of the discussions within the
recent flurry of sport and exercise psychology writings have been focused on the challenging
experiences of potential Olympians during an Olympic year. Indeed, the 2020 Olympics is an
entertainment event like few others across sport levels.
Within a previous editorial titled “Sport Psychology Services to High-Performance Athletes
During Covid-19”, our Co-Editors from the International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology
invited several renowned experts from the international amateur sport community to join us in
a dialog regarding how amatuer athletes from various national teams experienced their journeys through COVID-19. The editorial revealed convergences, though also idiosyncrasies in
how team training during the time of the pandemic has been undertaken within centralised
programs. The recent Olympic editorial can be found at the following link: https://doi.org/10.
1080/1612197X.2020.1754616.
The International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology is committed to advancing open
dialogs regarding all forms of sport and physical activity. The intention is to contribute to a
healthier world, through better evidence-based theory to practice. The IJSEP continues to
welcome all authors seeking to contribute to COVID-19 discussions to submit their scholarship,
emphasising the impacts of the pandemic on sport and physical activity participants, as well as
those who support them with psychological services.
Within this editorial, we have shifted our gaze to professional sport. Professional sport,
unlike Olympic sport, is accessible to viewership every year. There are a vast number of professional team and individual sports that attract viewership, whilst inspiring populations
within and across national boundaries. Akin to our recently aforementioned editorial, the
current editorial is accessible to you for free. Our composition of authorship in this editorial
is also diverse in sport representation. Given the large number of professional sports known
within our global community, the current contributors were narrowed to experts with vast
experience working in professional baseball (MLB – Charles Maher), golf (PGA, LPGA – Rich
Gordin), basketball (NBPA – William Parham), cricket (Stewart Cotterill), soccer (NFA –
Carsten Hvid Larsen), and one of our editors, who is actively involved in combat sport
(boxing, mixed martial arts, kick boxing – Robert Schinke). These experts have collaborated
to augment wider perspectives about professional sport athletes in a pandemic.
The contributors consider their recent and current approaches in active work with professional sport clients, following a sequence: (a) once professional sporting events stopped,
(b) current approaches in their work with professional athletes, and (c) a brief, broader reflection. What we hope the reader will find is that both temporal stages and the final conclusion
indicate growth opportunities for consultants and professional sport clients, alike. One of the
contributors was recently in a multisport mental performance consultant video session, and
a participant suggested that the current state of affairs in relation to elite athletes is being
experienced primarily as a tragic loss. Such a narrative might tell part of how athletes regard
the current moment in their careers, but it does not tell the full story, or for that matter, a
© 2020 International Society of Sport Psychology
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SPORT AND EXERCISE PSYCHOLOGY
2020, VOL. 18, NO. 4, 409–413
https://doi.org/10.1080/1612197X.2020.1766182mentally healthy story of the opportunities and teachable moments before us. We draw on the
structure directly above to inform the narrative of this editorial.
Emergence of the pandemic
During mid-March 2020, professional sports around the world were in preparation and performance scheduling. Sport as business took an immediate turn, with imminent closures and
the inability for athletes, coaches, managers, and mental performance consultants to continue
their onsite roles within their organisations. Our contributors were involved in developing (a)
action plans to accomplish the closure of training settings; (b) communicating the delicate
decision of closure to players and staff, who were well aware that their seasons were trending
toward a stoppage; and (c) for those who were working in cities away from their families, providing clients with health and safety travel guidelines as they made arrangements to return to
their home residences.
The ripple effect of an abrupt stoppage, or crisis transition, is known to leave athletes and
coaches with psychological and emotional challenges. At a population level, where athletes are
included, there are increased cases in domestic violence, suicide, and bigotry. One highly publicised challenge we understand is that each athlete is unique in her/his engagement with
social isolation. Though challenges with social distancing have been encountered worldwide,
much has been written in cultural sport psychology identifying variations in collective and individual approaches within and across cultures. Certain cultures and nationalities are formal in
terms of socially accepted distance, where people other than close family naturally maintain
extensive physical distance, such as six feet. There are also Hispanic and Latino cultures
where social exchanges are encountered at a closer physical distance, where people are normally demonstrative through hugs and kisses with friends and colleagues, beyond family
(Schinke, Hanrahan, & Catina, 2009). We cannot assume that even in a single Major League
Baseball franchise, professional boxing management group, cricket, or soccer team, that all athletes have experienced the required transition to formal cultural distance in the same way.
Some are more comfortable and some are ill at ease with social distancing.
Based on what we know from athlete identity research and practice, and our own
practical exposures, high-performance athletes, amateur and professional alike, emphasise
their athletic identities. Within professional sport, there are individual differences in terms of
how much emphasis is placed on an athletic identity as compared to the number of identities
that comprise one’s personhood. Many of our clients have families and partners, and some
have side businesses and enterprises. However, we do recognise that professional athletes
derive gainful employment from their sporting activities. Consequently the emphasis on an
athletic identity is often heavily weighted, perhaps disproportionately. Due to any athlete’s
long-term commitment to sport excellence at the highest level, some players rarely explore
other roles and contexts and, as a result, suffer from identity foreclosure and an overly
narrow, singular identity (Nesti & Littlewood, 2011), which is counter-productive during a pandemic due to social isolation.
The challenges that flow from an overly weighted athletic identity, then, can include
increased possibilities of anxiety, depression, addictions, and other mental health concerns
(Henriksen, Schinke, Moesch, McCann, Parham, Larsen & Terry, 2019). Exemplifying our point,
between March 22 and April 14, the percentage of professional soccer players reporting symptoms of depression doubled. FIFPRO and affiliated national player associations surveyed 1602
professional soccer players in countries that had implemented drastic measures to contain the
spread of the COVID-19 such as home-confinement. One thousand one hundred and thirty-four
male players, with a mean age of 26, and 468 female players, with a mean age of 23, took part in
410 EDITORIALthe survey. Twenty-two percent of women players and 13 percent of men players reported
symptoms consistent with a diagnosis of depression. Eighteen percent of the women and
16 percent of the men reported symptoms consistent with a diagnosis of generalised
anxiety (FIFPRO, 2020).
Just as there are identity challenges associated with a pandemic, like every other unforeseen
transition, there exist possibilities for personal enrichment. A pause for thought, albeit, in this
case a lengthier one than first might have been anticipated, is often assumed to be inertia in a
motivated, goal-directed athlete. The holistic opportunities for growth abound in such
moments. Time away from extensive and longstanding training commitments and travel
afford professional athletes time to develop their personal identities, existing relationships,
and explore a breadth of interests, beyond sport. The immediate pause was an opportunity
to nourish relationships, whilst nourishing one’s self.
Counterbalanced with the opportunity to reconnect has been for some, a recognition that
their playing contracts in the short-term were in peril. For example, a boxer is compensated
after each bout – no bouts, no income. With younger professionals who were less financially
heeled, discussions related to financial constraints layered on a further dimension of stress.
Several of the younger athletes with lesser contracts returned home and are presently residing
with parents or extended family. There is a second group of athletes we identified that are presently living alone. These athletes are even more socially isolated than those surrounded by
family members. Finally, athletes on the cusp of financial independence, with young families
of their own, continue to struggle as they await loosened restrictions and the inevitable reconceptualisation of what professional training and subsequent sporting events will be like, with
fewer fans in seats. Questions linger among athletes in terms of interruptions to existing career
paths, and associated, their financial livelihood. These questions could apply more deeply to
athletes residing in developing countries, where finances are perhaps, less available.
Current interventions
There is consensus among the authors that in order to work effectively with clients, we have
needed to develop an organic approach. The logical question we all have asked the athletes
is what exactly they are looking for in terms of support during this pandemic moment.
Some initially were uncertain in terms of how to respond to such an open-ended approach,
enveloped in an unfamiliar circumstance – COVID-19. These athletes now reside at home,
they are not among their peers, and they do need to feel that they are trending positively in
terms of their athletic careers. What follows are a few approaches we have integrated into
our work; some sport specific, some holistic. These approaches have been undertaken
through online means, such as the regular use of video platforms, and chat discussions and
forums with individuals and teams.
Our work is founded on the premise that athletes will best relate to structured communication and contact. Athletes, akin to all high-performance career professionals, evolve based
on logical short- and long-term plans. Their career pathways need to make sense, and each
needs to flow logically toward outcomes that can be parlayed into improved, consistent performance and viability into the future. The accountability in terms of planning must rest
with each athlete in terms of thoughts, emotions, and actions. When an athlete is invested
in self-improvement, he/she will allocate and schedule regular times within each week to
work on one’s mental game. Rarely is there the time to reflect with the guidance of a
mental performance consultant, perhaps in collaboration with a coaching staff member, to
identify existing gaps, and derive short-term plans that will compliment existing strengths.
Weekly scheduled small group discussions with key support staff members, followed by
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SPORT AND EXERCISE PSYCHOLOGY 411individual sessions with key providers, will lead to advancement in player development. Hence,
the immediate time at home can become treasured, not only in terms of what it offers personally and interpersonally but also in terms of unanticipated – newfound gains in sport-specific
skills.
Underlying regular support is an opportunity for the mental performance consultant to
forge a strengthened relationship with each athlete. During pre-season and in season, athletes
are focused on securing their positions, the immediacy of performance, and collaborating with
coaches and teammates. Proactive sport psychology work is often associated with player
access – something that can become challenging and scarce in professional sport. Alternately,
assigned tasks are often reactionary, based on immediate setbacks or struggles. During the
current moment, there is time to become further acquainted with each athlete’s uniqueness
as a person, and then, in terms of how that person comes forth to training and competition.
Reciprocally, the athlete has the time to learn about the mental performance consultant, in
terms of discussions around values and where and how the athlete’s gaps might coincide
with the practitioner’s skills. The work that ensues is then deepened through mutual understanding and a strengthened relationship, leading into the future and the anticipated return
to play.
The specifics that underpin each mental performance consultant’s work will vary depending
on each athlete’s needs and the path that is set toward valued progression(s). We have undertaken exercises focused on mindfulness, guided performance imagery, the re-setting of goals,
revisiting of competition plans, affirmation exercises, and broader holistic life balance and
values- related discussions. We have also engaged with groups of athletes, sometimes spanning sport organisations, where they are able to facilitate a sharing of their current experiences,
and the recognition that they are not alone in their career challenges. Peers are undergoing
similar challenges, which contributes to a recognition that each athlete is still among peers,
just from a virtual distance.
The path forward
There is hidden inspiration in the words that athletes, coaching staff, and mental performance
consultants have expressed since COVID-19. We find ourselves working in a positive direction,
for the betterment of sport as part of life. Each author identified above plays a part in how performances are being played out. Performances on the field are most often the end product of
active work and inspirations in a series of opportune moments. The most profound net gain has
been the strengthening of existing relationships within the athletes’ lives, in their personal and
professional spheres. Mental performance consultants often affirm that these relationships
serve as the basis of client engagement, contributing to sporting excellence. The current
time is historical, perhaps in more ways than people have envisioned. We are curious of new
ways to further human potential. The answers might be atypical based on how we previously
went about our roles as mental performance consultants. Atypical approaches can be healthy
and contributive to excellence, founded in ingenuity. We predict that the best in
professional sport performance is yet to come, and much of that progress will be gleaned
from the current pandemic moment, assuming time, for athletes and providers alike, is used
wisely.



NEW PAPER



fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 1
REVIEW
published: 12 November 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.585897
Edited by:
Syed Ghulam Meran Shah,
University of the Punjab, Pakistan
Reviewed by:
M. Teresa Anguera,
University of Barcelona, Spain
Maria Gianni,
University of Macedonia, Greece
*Correspondence:
Mogeda El Sayed El Keshky
drmogeda@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Organizational Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 21 July 2020
Accepted: 26 October 2020
Published: 12 November 2020
Citation:
El Keshky MES, Basyouni SS and
Al Sabban AM (2020) Getting
Through COVID-19: The Pandemic’s
Impact on the Psychology
of Sustainability, Quality of Life,
and the Global Economy – A
Systematic Review.
Front. Psychol. 11:585897.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.585897
Getting Through COVID-19: The
Pandemic’s Impact on the
Psychology of Sustainability, Quality
of Life, and the Global Economy – A
Systematic Review
Mogeda El Sayed El Keshky1,2
*, Sawzan Sadaqa Basyouni3 and
Abeer Mohammad Al Sabban3
1 King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 2 Assiut University, Asyut, Egypt, 3 Umm Al-Qura University, Mecca,
Saudi Arabia
The COVID-19 pandemic may affect the world severely in terms of quality of life, political,
environmental, and economic sustainable development, and the global economy. Its
impact is attested to by the number of research studies on it. The main aim of this study
is to evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on the psychology of sustainability (quality of
life), on sustainable development, and on the global economy. A computerized literature
search was performed, and journal articles from authentic sources were extracted,
including MEDLINE (PubMed), Google Scholar, Science Direct, ProQuest, and Emerald
Insight. The references in selected articles were screened to identify any relevant studies.
The following inclusion criteria were followed: research articles based on the COVID19 pandemic, and articles, research papers, journals, and news articles published
2010 to 2020. The exclusion criteria were as follow: psychology research, articles, and
journals published before 2010 and research articles having no link with the current
pandemic’s impact on the psychology of sustainability, quality of life, and the global
economy. Of the initial 350 articles identified, only 61 studies were found to be relevant
and meet the inclusion criteria. Based on these articles, the review highlights that
compared to developed countries, the developing nations and poor nations such as
African countries with compromised health structures have been greatly affected. There
are close associations between health, economic, environmental, and political issues
globally. The pandemic can be managed if we follow new policies that implement
economic and public health changes worldwide. A planned, coordinated approach
between the public-private sector is required, designed according to each country’s
health system and economy. We can come out of this crisis if we work together and
support both developed and developing nations.
Keywords: coronavirus disease, COVID-19, the psychology of sustainability, economic growth, sustainable
development, quality of life, world economy
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 585897fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 2
El Keshky et al. Getting Through the COVID-19 Pandemic
INTRODUCTION
There is a high rate of uncertainty related to COVID-19, whose
pandemic impacts economic performance, sustainability criteria,
and development processes. Haider et al. (2020) mention the
effect of coronavirus on health and economic crises. Analysis
of its growth in countries, clearly shows that its development
leads to crises. Declining GDP rates damage health, education,
and industrial progress globally. According to Herbert (2020),
COVID-19 affects socio-economic circumstances because of
declining global GDP, declining capital flows, fewer investment
opportunities, and decreased trading. Not limited to economic
loss, this pandemic impacts social parameters like the changes
in sustainable psychological development. Globally, the rate
of poverty is increasing. The International Monetary Fund
(IMF) World Economic Update for June estimated considerable
fluctuation in the final ratios (IMF, 2020).
More than 20 million people currently live in extreme
poverty; however, Mukhtar (2020) reports that an increase of
about 420 million is projected to be living in extreme poverty.
Findings gathered by the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO) reflect that COVID-19 has resulted in a
severe decline in human development for the first time since 1990
(Zandifar and Badrfam, 2020). Their examination reveals that the
current global picture lacks socio-economic development. These
issues and challenges directly affect an individual’s psychology
and assure them of a loss of psychological sustainability and the
addition of financial crises. Specifically, with many risks affecting
the public, cases of mental crises are increasing (Kang et al., 2019).
As a result of people being restricted to their homes and being
asked to maintain self-isolation, there is a high chance of someone
being severely affected psychologically, which is further impacted
by the lack of accurate guidelines or treatment.
When no resources are provided to manage people’s wellbeing, the situation, including pandemic prevention measures,
is reframed and affects psychological health. Concerning the
impact on sustainable psychology, Bai et al. (2020) discuss
the importance of improved mental health because it affects
individual growth and counters restricted personal activities.
The authorities’ actions and management criteria for regulating
the pandemic are beyond people’s control but adversely impact
their exercising, eating habits, gardening, dancing, meditation,
learning, and other activities. As a result, people perceive the
negative impact on their minds, and the sustainability of their
psychological health is damaged (Yao et al., 2020). In the view
of Li et al. (2020), COVID-19 impacts the quality of life and
mental health as it prejudices human living standards. The joint
United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS, 2020) notes
that this pandemic increases the numbers of people suffering
from stress and anxiety, conditions that are related to depression.
Thus, it is essential to conduct a study to evaluate the impact of
COVID-19 from the perspective of quality of life and economic,
psychological, and environmental perspectives.
Several research studies have highlighted the severe impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic. It is worth noting that the 2013 SARS
outbreak experienced in Hong Kong damaged mental health
(Fernandes, 2020), but, specific to COVID-19, there are diverse
effects on mental health following the imposition of preventive
measures. Social distancing, self-isolation, limited meetings, and
lack of interaction directly decelerate the economy and mental
health. Many countries face declining projected global trade and
export volumes. In the view of Allcott et al. (2020), psychological
sustainability involves the merger of political perspectives,
human development, and economic aspects, and COVID-19 has
had an impact on all three. Fetzer et al. (2020) discuss the
pandemic’s impact on the global economy as self-isolation results
in loss of business revenue. Restrictions on consumers being
able to purchase ultimately result in an economic downturn.
Apart from this, stresses are being constantly imposed on
people worldwide that negatively affect their minds and decrease
economic activity (Iacus et al., 2020). COVID-19’s considerable
impact has emotionally traumatized individuals; the handling
of the situation has reduced their level of comfort, socially,
economically, and environmentally, according to Cartwright
et al. (2020). The amalgamation of these factors triggers a
high level of stress in people’s minds, which, meanwhile, affects
economic development, as it ruins efforts for developmental
projects (Pirouz et al., 2020).
We have faced several epidemics in the past. Asian nations
were impacted by the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS
outbreak), and West Africa was under the attack by the Ebola
virus. They also influenced the socio-economic equilibrium,
affected public health, and caused numerous deaths similar to
what we are facing with COVID-19 (Marin, 2018; Lawanson and
Evans, 2019). The pandemic has affected all types of businesses.
There are shortages of medical equipment such as masks and
Personal Protection Equipment (PPE), etc. It has made us realize
how fragile our systems are and that no country can face this crisis
on its own. A targeted and collaborative approach is required.
The main aim of this current research is to evaluate the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the sustainability of the
quality of life, i.e., how people are tending toward stress, anxiety,
depression, and other health/mental issues. Not limited to this
alone, the study discusses the pandemic’s impact on sustainable
development psychologically and economically. Given that
changes in psychological sustainability link with people’s living
style, and how they deal with their life situations, there is a
need to conduct a study in this direction. Currently, there are
reports and research articles that separately discuss the impact of
COVID-19’s rapid spread on the health system, mental health,
sustainability, and the global economy (Allcott et al., 2020;
Banerjee, 2020; Pirouz et al., 2020). Research related to the
pandemic’s simultaneous effects on the psychological, economic,
and environmental paradigms is required. That is why this
study explores information about and human experiences that
influence their quality of life psychologically, economically, and
environmentally.
Due to the pandemic, trade has also been largely affected. The
impact of this chaos will have a long-term effect on globalization.
All private and public sectors are under its influence (Donald,
2020). Previously, all large companies had goals focused only on
financial gain. However, now the level of interconnected trade
has lost its meaning. There has been an unequal distribution
of the benefits associated with globalization (Roome, 2011).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 585897fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 3
El Keshky et al. Getting Through the COVID-19 Pandemic
The more powerful governments and those who own major
conglomerations should realize that unless we work together, the
overall quality of life will be compromised globally. Working
culture and environment and the worker’s s policies should
be looked into to obtain a flexible, innovative, and empathetic
workplace for everyone to deal with this crisis.
Therefore, the aim of this research report is to:
• Analyze the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the
sustainability of quality of life
• Determine the effect of the COVID-19 on the economic,
social, and political factors relating to the sustainable
development environment
• Evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the
global economy
• Examine the organizational changes and solutions for
dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic, and
• Highlight the effect of support of the world trade
environmental infrastructure in tackling the condition of
COVID-19.
METHODOLOGY
Study Design
All the guidelines and principles were followed while preparing
the methodology for this research. A thorough literature search
was conducted, and after proper evaluation and analysis, relevant
literature was identified and included for the present review.
To accomplish the desired objectives, all the studies related to
the topic published from Jan 2010 to June 2020 were selected. It
was assumed that including some publications of the previous
decade would be helpful in reflecting upon the practices and
strategies that were implemented in situations previously like
the global economic recession A computerized literature search
was performed and journal articles from authentic sources
were extracted, including MEDLINE (PubMed), Google Scholar,
Science Direct, ProQuest, and Emerald Insight. The References
in the selected articles were screened to identify any relevant
studies. The literature search was performed by including the
following keywords: “Coronavirus” OR “pandemic” OR “SARSCoV-2” OR “COVID-19” OR “sustainability” OR “quality of
life” OR “Global economy” OR “psychology and Organizational
changes and COVID-19.”
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
The inclusion criteria were: research articles based on the
COVID-19 pandemic and articles, research papers, journals,
and news articles published from 2010 to 2020; articles on
sustainability management related to virus pandemic. The
exclusion criteria were: psychology research, articles, and journals
published before 2010; research articles having no link with the
current pandemic’s impact on the psychology of sustainability,
quality of life, and the global economy and additionally, articles
that were in languages other than English. The process of
retrieving and screening the studies according to these criteria in
this systematic review is shown in Figure 1. After an initial search,
FIGURE 1 | Flow diagram illustrating the literature search and selection criteria
(according to PRISMA, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analysis; Moher et al., 2009).
a total of 265 articles were identified in MEDLINE (PubMed), and
85 through other databases. After removing the duplicate records,
272 titles and abstracts were screened. Finally, only 61 studies
were found to be relevant and meet the inclusion criteria.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Psychology of Sustainability
According to Chandler (2020), the psychology of sustainability
and the criteria for relative development are associated with
socio-economic progress, leading to improved living standards.
The study by Srivastava et al. (2020) proposed that the
management of sustainability relates to ecology, equity, and
economy. Meanwhile, Cartwright et al. (2020) observed that
COVID-19 affects the quality of life as overall economic,
ecological, and equity conditions have changed. According to
Bastola et al. (2020), psychological and sustainability factors
contribute to well-being and allow psychological development.
Recycling, dismantling, and demolishing factors are affected by
sustainability. The psychology of sustainability also relates to
deconstruction, recoverability, and oxygenation (Iacus et al.,
2020). Using the micro-dimension of awareness creates an
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 585897fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 4
El Keshky et al. Getting Through the COVID-19 Pandemic
opportunity to increase awareness that ultimately enables
involvement in self-centered development criteria.
Impact of Coronavirus Disease on the
Psychology of Sustainability and Quality
of Life
Political, environmental, and economic aspects collectively
determine sustainable development psychologically (Bowen et al.,
2017). These aspects also determine how humans should spend
their current lives so that the same quality of life can be
transferred to and enjoyed by future generations. According to
Garfin et al. (2020), minimal changes in human life slowly alter
the future, but future generations will not perceive their lives as
the outcome of change; they will think that people before them
have led their lives in similar ways. World Wars and pandemics
have impacted our present lives. Moreover, the COVID-19
pandemic has dramatically impacted the political, environmental,
and economic aspects of human life on which psychological
development and sustainability are dependent. This ultimately
affects the quality of life by disturbing people’s living standards.
The outbreak of COVID-19 in early 2020 has agitated social
problems and threatened the economies of the world (Nicola
et al., 2020). According to Arden and Chilcot (2020), growth and
development in different countries have stopped. The financial
stability of both developed and undeveloped countries has been
shattered as the pandemic has targeted many lives. Human beings
are highly dependent on socialization. Because social distancing
and lockdown are necessary precautions for avoiding COVID19, the resultant increased stress and depression directly lessens
the quality of life (Balasubramanian, 2020). Most people around
the globe are losing their jobs, i.e., their income. Profit margins
and revenue generated by various organizations have dropped.
To save the economy and their citizens’ psychological health
from the pandemic, many countries have developed strategies,
but years of struggle will be required to regain economic stability.
Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated crises
have traumatized people’s psychological well-being, especially
employees who have lost their jobs. The well-being of employees
working from home is compromised as the gap between their
professional and personal lives has reduced (Pratt and Frost,
2020). The situation has stressed employees and has led to an
uncomfortable and aggressive relationship with the organization,
which has directly, or indirectly ruined their psychological
sustainability on a macro level. According to Mahase (2020), the
world before and after this pandemic will never be the same as
people have isolated themselves, millions of lives have already
gone, and the global economy has slowed exponentially. COVID19 has imposed the harsh realities of unemployment, illness,
and bereavement on people, and long-lasting hardships and
struggles are required to mitigate the situation’s negative impact.
Coronavirus has substantially impacted people’s psychology and
has created an extensive psychological experiment on human
beings, which will eventually change the overall lifestyle of
current and future generations.
Knowing that the condition of the current pandemic has
diverse effects on psychological sustainability, disturbs the
quality of life, and restricts people to having to deal with
preventive measures. However, according to Di Fabio (2017), the
management of the psychology of sustainability helps to foster
well-being and enhance working conditions within society. There
are changes in behavior in which most people are suffering from
stress, anxiety, and fatigue (Wang et al., 2020). The full lockdown
restriction of staying in the home negatively impacts on human
living standards. Professional examination reveals that increasing
cases related to post-traumatic stress, nutritional deficiencies,
and psychological issues have been reported. Oher psychological
impacts of COVID-19 include a growing fear of leaving home.
Impact of Coronavirus Disease on
Sustainable Development
Impact of Coronavirus Disease on Economic
Conditions
The interdependency of overall prosperity and integrity of health
emphasizes human dependence on the state of the economy.
Econometric analysis of the world’s economic growth rate shows
that the current pandemic has led to widespread health crises
and economic damage. According to Haider et al. (2020), the
economic situation depends on the GDP rate helping to affect
economic recovery measures. Global economic crises due to
COVID-19 reveal economic decline. Moreover, the report by
Allcott et al. (2020) highlights the declining economy related
to fluctuations in GDP rates. In the current scenario, the GDP
rate has shrunk by approximately 4.2%, the first time for a
pandemic (Fetzer et al., 2020). Another report estimated that a
difference of 7% is projected in the coming period if the same
conditions continue (IMF Blog, 2020). Additionally, there will be
a considerable number of further crises if the IMF faces losses.
The overall rates of advanced economies like those of Europe
and America have declined the same as emerging economies
(Kang et al., 2019).
COVID-19 impacts global trade and investment. In
Fernandes’ view (2020), changing global trading volumes
can be observed, and all industries are eventually affected by
the pandemic. The World Trade Organization (WTO) supports
this view (WTO.org, 2020). Its graphs represent the changes in
the average value of trade, which includes a contribution by the
IMF to change the economic outlook, which, in turn, relates to
growing global poverty and declining living standards (Bastola
et al., 2020). GDP growth projections make it apparent that living
standards are heading to extreme poverty at an increased rate.
Subsequently, this negatively affects the economy, as it leads to
economic crises.
Chandler (2020) reports that COVID-19 has impacted labor
by 68% in just 2 weeks, which signifies the loss of many jobs
and directly increases stress levels. The highest unemployment
rates are in Asia, Europe, and America. In Asia and the Pacific
regions, unemployment rates have headed toward a decrease of
4.5%. In America, Europe, and Central Asia, it is 10.5%. Apart
from this, fluctuations in trading sectors have led to a decline
in manufacturing, textile, cosmetics, and many more industries.
According to Iacus et al. (2020), COVID-19 has enormously
impacted the income ratios in developed and developing
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 585897fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 5
El Keshky et al. Getting Through the COVID-19 Pandemic
countries. A shift in fiscal policy packages has been assessed
across 162 countries. It was distributed as Austria (∼17.80% of
GDP), France (∼15.30% of GDP), Qatar (∼13.00% of GDP),
United States (∼10.50% of GDP), and Australia (∼9.70% of
GDP). Monetary stimulus packages across these 162 countries
were distributed as Bahrain (26% of GDP), China (14.14% of
GDP), Germany (12.49% of GDP), and the United Kingdom
9.09% of GDP; Sarkodie and Owusu, 2020).
Impact of Coronavirus Disease on Environmental
Issues
Along with the impact of COVID-19 on economic conditions,
there is an environmental impact, which Cartwright et al. (2020)
discuss. The COVID-19 situation impacts global emissions,
especially in relation to the release of emissions into the
atmosphere. The lessening of CO2 emissions relates to the
effect of COVID-19 on human development, which in the view
of Bastola et al. (2020), led to the 2020 financial crisis. The
restrictions on human development and declining rates of change
evolved along with the loss of environmental degradation. It
was observed that in Asian and European countries, the extent
of the ambient particulate matter has declined significantly
(Gautam and Trivedi, 2020; Kasha, 2020). Urban and industrial
areas have less carbon monoxide and aerosol in the present
situation (Gautam and Trivedi, 2020; Holthaus, 2020). These
environmental gains mirror the losses in the fields of health,
education, income, and trade (Bai et al., 2020).
Impact of Coronavirus Disease on Political Issues
The coronavirus’s impact can be observed politically when
lockdown and self-isolation result in reduced export and import
rates. In the current situation, it is difficult to carry out activities
designed to run the economic wheel (Haider et al., 2020).
Furthermore, there has been a considerable shift in the policies
and strategies related to economic policies. On the industrial
level, there has been a decline in line with industrial restriction.
Even though support is being provided for business opportunities
to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic, there are still restrictions
on mobilizing current development. According to Bastola et al.
(2020), political parties have provided funds and highlighted
financial support to ensure people’s survival during COVID-19.
Moreover, the impact of lockdown, isolation, and rescheduling,
as well as the spread and fear of the virus, have resulted in new
political perceptions.
Impact of Coronavirus Disease on the
Global Economy
According to Moti and Ter Goon (2020), global economic
integration is required to deal with the implications of the
coronavirus pandemic. A balanced partnership between the
public-private sector, which takes into account the contextual
economy and health system, and is specific to each country’s
situation, will help national as well as international health
and economic recovery. The world’s total GDP depends on
the economies of separate countries; China’s economy is the
largest contributing economy, and the United States’s, the second
largest. Due to COVID-19, most factories are moving toward
closure and stopping the production of goods. This lack of
production of goods and services has a great impact on the
consumers, and no significant purchasing practices have been
recorded since the spread of COVID-19. In the same context,
declining sales are forcing the international market to face the
situation. Brands like Apple, Toyota, Jaguar, Land Rover, and
many more are facing the loss of investors and consumers
(Ahmad et al., 2020). According to Qiu et al. (2020), Hyundai
has shut down its business services and supply operations due
to a lack of consumer purchases. Starbucks has shut outlets as
consumers cannot purchase. A reduction in the import rate of
oil by China resulted in a decline in international oil prices.
Multiple uncertainties have been observed in the consumption
of smartphones as both demand and supplies are worsening.
The car production company, S&P, has faced declining purchases
(Ahmad et al., 2020). The aftermath of COVID-19 will thus
impact the global economy. According to an IMF report (IMF,
2020), the issues related to the current pandemic will restrict
the global economy. Overall sustainable development criteria are
expected to collapse. The distribution of economic policy globally
in response to COVID-19 was conducted across 166 countries.
It demonstrated that the United States is at the top, followed
by Sweden. There are few countries with no economic policy
such as Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Yemen, Liberia, and Denmark
(Sarkodie and Owusu, 2020).
Organizational Survival Envisioned by
Human Resources During the Pandemic
During the outbreak of the coronavirus, management styles
need to be changed to tackle operations and reduce the chances
of a crisis, according to Ågerfalk et al. (2020). This includes
consideration of online management, as online networks can
help organizations survive. In Donald’s view (2020), there are
two major types of organizational arrangements: traditional and
a new post-pandemic system. The traditional structure (prepandemic model) has existed during the past five or six decades.
However, its demerits were clearly evident during this pandemic.
It lacks clarity when defining roles and responsibilities. There
is a disparity in outcome attainment, and system workingconditions are less efficient. Although power allocation is part
of the matrix structure, in a crisis, it can lead to instability
and loss of control (Roome, 2011), resulting in an inadequate
organizational structure. The new-age model (post-pandemic)
focuses on the innovation, knowledge, and better required
skillsets (Guan and Huang, 2014). Organizations that are quickly
adaptive build creativity and possess a sharing attitude will be in a
better situation to manage its employees post-pandemic. The old
models based on power and control need to shift to a more open,
flexible, and modernized culture.
In the current situation, typical hierarchical organizations
will not result in better outcomes as the approach to allocate
power and authority to a specific group will restrict working
conditions. Human resources (HR) has envisioned a new model,
using distributed leadership, innovation, and continuous training
to adapt to the changing times (Hu, 2014) to obtain effective
results. According to McConnell’s (2020) study, organizations
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 585897fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 6
El Keshky et al. Getting Through the COVID-19 Pandemic
with networked, hierarchical, distributed leadership styles,
cross-training practices, and flexible guidelines using survival
techniques to tackle COVID-19 conditions.
Support of World Trade Environmental
Infrastructure to Tackle COVID-19
The impact of COVID-19 is not limited to sustainable
development, as there are challenges associated with global trade
management. According to the United Nations Environment
Program (United Nations Environment Programme [UNEP],
2020), trade is essential for saving livelihoods and increasing
economic cooperation. Whether it is related to COVID-19 or
typical situations, trade infrastructure boosts the confidence
level of operations and allows improvement of the transparency
of environmental trade infrastructure (Deshmukh and Haleem,
2020). Other than this, multiple actions and procedures
need to be followed for the management of the COVID-19
situation (Hishan et al., 2020). With support from world trade’s
environment infrastructure, there is an opportunity to supply
food and health products. This may help organizations to avoid
unnecessary export and import practices. Development in world
trade’s environmental infrastructure helps ensure public interest
and government support to effectively analyze the development
choices. Gilbert et al. (2020) confirm the importance of world
trade environmental infrastructure to boost the confidence level
and increase the transparency of economies. Deshmukh and
Haleem (2020) consider that the transparency of shared strong
data or collections of information contributes to supporting the
managed infrastructure required for COVID-19.
When West Africa suffered from a massive outbreak of the
Ebola virus, it led to a high death rate and affected the country at
numerous levels (Smith et al., 2019). Socio-economic disparity,
slow growth rates, shortage of food, and loss of businesses and
jobs resulted. We are facing a similar situation presently, which
demands that the health, economic, and environmental policies
should be modified so we can recover from this crisis and
collaborate in the future efficiently (Smith et al., 2019).
RESEARCH FINDINGS
The analysis helped to evaluate the impact of COVID-19 on
the psychology of sustainability, quality of life, and the global
economy. In the initial search, we found 350 articles, including 78
duplicate articles. After title and abstract screening, we were left
with 272 articles. Of these, 112 were assessed for eligibility, and
only 61 met the inclusion criteria. After extraction, the relevant
articles were categorized into the following subheadings to
provide a clear description: the author and year of the published
article; the assessment of the key findings due to COVID-19;
the present implications caused by the pandemic, and future
perspective that will help in the recovery from this crisis situation.
See Table 1. The focus of this work is to review the research work
published specifically in response to COVID-19. It is interesting
to observe that the majority of the studies were from 2019 to
2020. This is justified as the pandemic occurred in very recent
times. Hence the research mainly highlighted its current impact
globally and the lessons learned from current scenarios. Among
these, the majority are review articles, and only a few of them
were randomized and controlled clinical trials, which assessed the
economic, environmental, health, and sustainability impacts.
COVID-19 caused greater chaos than previous pandemics. It
is represented in all the studies: the global spread, its implications,
and how it has ruined all sectors, small and large. Even though the
assessment of various factors has been done in the studies, clear,
conclusive steps to be followed are not included in many of them.
The research has shown that developing countries are in a far
worse situation in managing their health systems and economy
than developed countries. Additionally, people of the rural areas,
the elderly, women, and children are undergoing major stresses
and life changes due to the pandemic. Even though air pollution
has decreased tremendously in all countries, post-pandemic there
will be piles of medical waste, which will impact the entire
environment. These research projects show that the management
and leadership systems based on power and control are not a
sustainable option in the future. Long use of a lack of creativity,
technological usage, and strict policies cannot be continued now.
Table 1 clearly shows that the pandemic has disrupted the
balance among all the nations. Though the impact is mainly
seen in the health sector and the economy, on a deeper level,
everything is affected. There is the struggle of SMEs, social
distancing norms, working from home, the new era of online
teaching, the suffering of daily-wage workers, a crisis situation
for the restaurants, hotels, and aviation department, changes in
fiscal and monetary policies, the psychological impact on health
professionals and health workers, and the extra workload on
the sanitation department. In terms of analyzing the research
findings of the included studies, it is very clear that the
impact of the pandemic has been assessed by one or more
of the factors (health, economy, environment, sustainability, or
management). However, it is clear that a conclusive result based
on the psychology of sustainability, overall well-being, and global
economic implications is lacking. Thus, this has contributed to
the goal of the present study: how can we learn from these
challenges faced by humans globally?
DISCUSSION
Analysis of the impact of COVID-19 on the global economy
highlights that various elements affect economic conditions. The
study by Pirouz et al. (2020) observes that the current pandemic
hurts GDP as it directly weakens a region’s overall economy. This
is supported by the view that the loss of consumer consumption
affects the economy of regional economies, too (Fetzer et al.,
2020). In other words, multiple socio-economic factors lessen the
economic rate and decelerate the global economy.
The collected data also discusses the impact of COVID19 on psychological sustainability. The information gathered
revealed that humans experience an increasing rate of uncertainty
when stress, anxiety, and depression are continually increasing
(UNAIDS, 2020). According to Zandifar and Badrfam (2020),
there are various ways by which COVID-19 can affect sustainable
development psychologically. Evaluation of elements related to
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 585897fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 7
El Keshky et al. Getting Through the COVID-19 Pandemic TABLE 1 | Impact of COVID-19 and future perspective to improve health, economy, sustainability, and quality of life. Author/Year Assessment Implications Future perspective Moti and Ter Goon, 2020 Impact on the health and the economy As compared to the developed countries, the developing nations and poor nations such as African countries with a compromised health structure have been greatly affected. New policies should be implemented that focus on economic recovery as there has been inflation for essential goods and services. Government should strategically execute revised norms to combat the pandemic. It should implement a mitigation policy and a post-pandemic policy. The mitigation policy should target the nation’s health sector. It will include various new changes to deal with the pandemic such as defined containment measures, protection of health workers with additional benefits. Increased supply of the sanitizers and other Personal Protection Equipment (PPE). Regional opening of testing centers. Online education aimed at improving the awareness regarding the risks associated with COVID-19 and how to successfully manage them. The post-pandemic recovery policy will ensure that individual follow social distancing properly and also abide by the lockdown rules. For people to sustain they can be allowed to work for specific hours at offices, avoiding gatherings, etc. so that the businesses as well as the citizens are not at a loss. Sarkodie and Owusu, 2020 Assessed impact on the environment, health and economy. Air pollution has declined, however, the amount of medical waste has dramatically increased. Several fiscal measures, changes in the monetary policies and economy recovery have been shared by private sectors across numerous countries. Of 143 countries, United Kingdom ranks with the highest level of uncertainty in the assessment of pandemic uncertainty. Among 162 countries, United States has implemented the greatest policy cuts. Due to the crisis, many developing and developed countries will face recession as they have introduced several new policies such as fiscal, and monetary measures, and additional welfare costs with health policies. This has impacted developing and weaker nations badly. To deal with the economic slowdown, these countries will adapt to a scaled effect. Priority will be given to resource depletion over the sustainable utilization Governments across all the nations should aim to achieve an outcome ensuring that health, economy and sustainable development are not compromised once we recover from the pandemic. Berchin and de Andrade Guerra, 2020 Impact on sustainable development of all the sectors COVID-19 has led to an increased demand of healthier and organic food making the various food systems susceptible. The impact of the pandemic is largely observed among women, children, elderly, wage workers, and small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Several measures should be taken to achieve a balance among all sectors: Regional mobilization: Policies to ensure trade is continued and involves private firms to help small and medium enterprises. Global support to combat the risk associated with the cross-border transactions. Enhanced accessibility of technology: With the changing world and innovation occurring at a faster pace, technology should be provided in all the rural areas so people can access all kinds of information post-pandemic. Revised Policy: Policies to strengthen the overall system and not only focus solely on financial growth. Education: Encourage use of technologies and distance learning irrespective of the region or nationality. (Continued)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 585897fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 8
El Keshky et al. Getting Through the COVID-19 Pandemic TABLE 1 | Continued Author/Year Assessment Implications Future perspective Donald, 2020 Impact on management and leaders; business and the decision models The design models of many organizations were based on the lack of creativity and flexibility, which were favorable 30 to 40 years ago. The importance of decision making, risk management, and involvement of stakeholders that worked previously needs modification in the present situation. New organizational structures are required, based on innovation, confidence, risk taking attitude, and flexibility. In the newly-designed organizations there should be no restricted roles, responsibilities, or structure. Training should be conducted so everyone is adaptive and can modify their needs as per requirements. Kottika et al., 2020 Impact on SMEs involving business and consumer markets There has been economic breakdown in the growth of United States GDP as it decreased by 4.8% in the first quarter of 2020. In European nations, GDP shrunk by 3.8% in the same period It is important to develop entrepreneurial personality traits as it is clearly shown that their attitude plays a significant role in the orientation of SMEs. A high quality of service should be provided to consumers following specific protocols that are open to change depending on the market situation. Etemad, 2020 Impact on the quality of life, economy, as well as the organization of various institutions. There has been a slowdown in the functioning of all sectors whether in a large or a small city, rural area or urban place. However, SMEs are the ones that have been impacted the most due to the pandemic. The situation prior to the crisis should be assessed closely, and processes followed regarding entrepreneurial and internationalization perspectives. A review and reevaluation of sectors should be done to maximize financial support to those who cannot recover on their own.
sustainability reveals that associations of social, environmental,
and economic factors lead to psychological sustainability
practices. The collected data reveals the impact of COVID-19
on the psychology of sustainability. The current situation has
a consistent impact on people’s mind-sets. As a result, there
is a need to adapt services to tackle mental health issues to
allow people to survive with an improved quality of life (Li
et al., 2020). With the declining economy, the contribution
of COVID-19 can be observed in the global emission system.
Labor can expect to decline in the future, and there is a high
chance of an individual facing job loss. This overall situation
leads to stress and restricts people in developing the economy
sustainably (Chandler, 2020). These employment issues are also
linked with psychological factors as they are the leading cause
of stress and depression, and ultimately hurt the quality of life
(Banerjee, 2020).
The collected data shows that HR departments are now
changing working criteria and focusing on alternative working
solutions for organizations. Allcott et al. (2020) observe that
COVID-19 forces HR to shift management from close-ended
to open-ended leadership styles. A dispersed workforce and its
interdependency on loose criteria are considered necessary for
organizational survival in the pandemic. Apart from this, HR
prefers to adopt flexible guidelines and cross-training practices
to provide practices and services to manage the pandemic’s
result. These sorts of instructions and guidelines help HR ensure
the survival of an organization and save corporations from the
calamities experienced by COVID-19 (Fernandes, 2020).
Similarly, most organizations are reacting in a managed
manner to increase their productive outcomes. It has been clear
that a declining projection rate is observed globally, and no
improvement for the projected rates is expected (Pratt and Frost,
2020). According to a report published by WHO (WTO.org,
2020), a loss of capital flows and a decline in annual charges is
decelerating economic conditions. Furthermore, there are also
considerable COVID-19 effects in the form of losses faced by
global trade and investment practices. Analysis of the impact of
COVID-19 on the economy reveals that the world’s economy is
expected to face further decreases in volumes and global trade
projections because the current situation is worsening day by day.
Along with this, there is an impact of COVID-19 politically,
which results in reduced exports and imports. Politically, a high
level of funds is required to support a country’s regulation
(Bowen et al., 2017). The spread of the virus endangers the
overall sustainability of development. The situation during
COVID-19 has been managed by the support of trade’s
environmental infrastructure as various macro-level elements
help to ensure sustainable development. With the help of
improved access to advanced technologies, it is anticipated
that production processes can make development more efficient
(Haider et al., 2020). There is a shortage in the supply of
drugs and medicine for mental health issues. This, according to
pharmacists, is a significant issue. It hinders the development
of health services and makes it difficult for practitioners to
improve their patients’ quality of life (UNAIDS, 2020). There
is an opportunity for support of world trade environmental
infrastructure as this allows corporations to work with advanced
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 585897fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 9
El Keshky et al. Getting Through the COVID-19 Pandemic
infrastructures and increased interest levels. Moreover, world
trade support systems may enhance the efficient supply of
food and medicines. With this, there is a clear avoidance of
import and export practices without advanced infrastructures
(Herbert, 2020). With infrastructure support, there is a high
chance of transparency in the management of economies when
these companies support the developed infrastructure (Arden
and Chilcot, 2020). World trade environmental infrastructure
support includes a focus on planting trees and promoting
sustainable practices to provide useful opportunities to increase
healthy regional recovery.
The impact of COVID-19 on psychological sustainability can
be examined by observing the changes in people’s behavior.
Di Fabio (2017) shared the thoughts of people quitting the
workplace because of the pandemic, as this also affected
educational institutions. Along with this, a lack of healthcarerelated facilities contributed to the negative psychological impact
on sustainability. Balkhi et al. (2020) found that various
psychological factors affect people’s behavior, ultimately changing
global lifestyles. More than 80% of people worldwide show
more concern about safety as they prefer to reduce physical
contact with others (Wang et al., 2020). Around 23% of people
face extremely anxious conditions due to mental well-being
(UNAIDS, 2020). Other than this, the peoples’ behavioral changes
include increasing exhaustion and fatigue that directly restrict
them from working toward development.
There is a link between the psychology of sustainability,
sustainable development, and economic crises because all these
depend on the quality of life and related improvement (Rothan
and Byrareddy, 2020). Zenker and Kock (2020) mention that
the COVID-19 pandemic changes people’s lifestyles globally by
affecting their social, economic, and environmental contexts.
Multiple reasons drag the psychology of sustainability toward
losses in profit margins and revenue generated. Kang et al.
(2019) highlighted the crisis rate of COVID-19 by reflecting
on job crises, consumption rates by consumers, and increasing
unemployment rates. One COVID-19 impact on individual
well-being is that compromised work policies make it difficult
for employees to survive peacefully. In the same context,
multiple changes are observed in the situation experienced
globally as the condition of self-isolation makes people less
interested in harming the economy. Some of the destructive
realities associated with coronavirus disease include illness,
unemployment, bereavement, long-lasting hardship, and struggle
in handling the situation (Fetzer et al., 2020). Other than this,
there are diverse effects of COVID-19 economically, socially, and
environmentally. Rothan and Byrareddy (2020) used a survey to
explore the psychological impact of the ongoing pandemic and
found that people suffer from a lack of confidence and from
the infection itself. There is less concern about the maintenance
of health, as most people do not have access to infection
control measures. Along with this, there is no realization of the
situation’s gravity. People can only understand it in terms of
their situations.
Multiple uncertainties result from the outbreak of COVID-19,
as this affects the individual and humanity at large. COVID-19
has an impact on the psychology of sustainability, the nature
of thought, and the attitudes expressed. Within this context,
continual stresses are imposed on people from restrictions
that negatively affect their minds. Along with this, COVID19 stresses employees and others and creates an uncomfortable
relationship with a peaceful life, directly and indirectly affecting
psychological sustainability.
People’s psychologies have changed, as they are dependent on
the global situation, currently negatively affected by COVID-19.
The result is that the COVID-19 pandemic and associated crises
have traumatized people’s psychological well-being by disturbing
their social, economic, and environmental peace. The lack of
work policies leads to stress, as criteria for managing the situation
are, as yet, undeveloped. The data involving regional GDP
rates, economic efficiencies, sales rates, and trade rates reveal an
economic impact of COVID-19. All these aspects are directly and
indirectly associated with the pandemic. A fall of 7.2% in GDP
has been observed in economies.
However, we can learn from past crises to survive the present
global economic loss. In the Greek financial breakdown, 700,000
jobs were lost between 2008 and 2014 (KEPE, 2015). More
than 35% of medium-sized businesses were largely impacted as
compared to small businesses. Entrepreneurs managed to come
out of the crisis by providing us some key findings that can
help us to better deal with COVID-19. They ensured that their
products met all their consumers’ needs, lowered their prices
(Bourletidis and Triantafyllopoulos, 2014), utilized advanced
tools and technologies to provide something meaningful
(Giannacourou et al., 2015). Additionally, entrepreneurial or
managerial personality traits played a significant role in defining
company successes (Elenurm et al., 2014; Espíritu-Olmos and
Sastre-Castillo, 2015).
The various findings reveal that fluctuations regarding trading
system volumes when this relates to losses or improvements in
industries worldwide. They also reveal an increased proportion
of living standards worldwide is heading toward extreme poverty.
Crises are facing energy production as there are lower CO2
emissions, which mirrors the fact that human development
and progress are declining. Changes in management styles are
required to deal with how society operates and reduce the
chance of further crises. However, the adoption of a networked,
hierarchical, distributed leadership style, cross-training practices,
and flexible guidelines will benefit corporations in tackling
the COVID-19 crises. Finally, the impact of COVID-19 can
be tackled by the support of the world trade environmental
infrastructure, which is known to boost the confidence levels
of corporations in operations and improve the transparency
of global trade.
IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE
PERSPECTIVES
Humans have witnessed several previous crises in different
regions and countries, and humanity emerged from them. We
should think about creating a global change to prevent further
suffering caused by the COVID crisis. It is highly probable that a
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 585897fpsyg-11-585897 May 22, 2021 Time: 15:25 # 10
El Keshky et al. Getting Through the COVID-19 Pandemic
recurrence of the present crisis will strike the global population
more severely. It is therefore desirable that:
1. Government be proactive and implement planned
precautions now before the situation worsens.
2. Management, institutions, and organizations develop
their skill sets demonstrate sustainability, resilience, and
innovation as COVID-19 has compromised traditional
business management and systems.
3. Globally, nations plan and sanction policies for the
collective good instead of their own self-interests.
4. All educational institutions provide necessary guidance
and professional help to deepen understanding of crisis
management. This will help individuals to become aware,
protect themselves, and avoid any risks or harm caused by
their negligence.
5. All the important health organizations, health
professionals, scientists, and researchers be provided
a targeted fund that provides sufficient training and
understanding regarding the pandemic’s impact on public
health, so the next crisis is dealt with more effectively.
6. Humanity take a collective approach to avoid unnecessary
harm to the environment. The earth can be saved if each
one of us becomes more responsible, provides support, and
care for one another.
We can learn a lot from this pandemic and become more
capable of dealing with any future crisis.
CONCLUSION
This pandemic has taught us that the entire world is connected.
If we do not work together and cooperate, humanity will suffer
drastically. We need to implement a few changes so that we not
only emerge from this crisis but are also able to continue with our
lives in a healthy and sustainable way. Firstly, it is important that
marketing processes are modified. Instead of blindly following
brands and getting attracted to the logos, etc., companies should
try to meet their customers’ requirements. There should be a
shift in business approaches from financial targets to what is best
for customers. Unnecessary use of plastic products should be
strictly prohibited. Secondly, any health-related issue should be
handled at a global level. If we limit ourselves to our own specific
race, ethnicity, culture, nationality, and background, humanity
will not be able to sustain this pandemic. A broader view and
understanding of public health need to be the key drivers for
all political parties. Thirdly, globally oriented with specific goals,
WHO should be the decision-maker for our health and wellbeing. Guaranteed budgets should be allocated, and policies
prioritizing health in different regions and cultures should be
planned. Fourthly, people from all cultures and interests, such
as health professionals, scientists, environmentalists, researchers,
politicians, sociologists, and ethicists should cooperate and work
to improve the current situation. Additionally, all the policies
related to the functioning of society, taxation, fiscal policy,
environmental issues, economy, and health should be changed so
humans can survive on planet Earth harmoniously.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.
FUNDING
The authors would like to thank The Deanship of Scientific
Research at Umm Al-Qura University for supporting this work
by Grant Code: 18-HUM-1-03-0002.



NEW PAPER


Sport psychology services to high performance athletes
during COVID-19
These are trying times for us all. COVID-19 has altered our lives as citizens. The changes associated with the current pandemic have presented sport and exercise psychologists with many
challenges and opportunities related to sport performance, physical activity and health.
Here, we focus on what was, and is presently, being encountered by mental performance consultants in relation to the aspiring Olympic athletes they are supporting.
Within recent weeks, mental performance consultants working with Olympic aspirants have
evidenced a growing number of suggestions how aspiring athletes might proceed in their
sports and in their broader lives, based on their national conditions and regional responses
to the pandemic. Each national funding agency, Olympic committee, federal government,
and sport organisation, is rolling out strategies of how mental performance consultants can
work effectively with clients in what for many, but not all, is a socially distanced world.
Discussions have varied from the challenges that athletes are encountering to issues associated with social isolation, career disruption, qualification process uncertainty, and unconventional and limited access to effective training environments and training partners.
Underpinning these considerations is the health and wellbeing of athletes in their pursuits
toward excellence.
Historically, editorials within the International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology were
paired with special issues, such as the one focused on international approaches to Olympic
athlete performance, published in 2016. Within the current editorial, however, there is a deviation in approach, caused by a global circumstance – sport is not being experienced as usual;
the challenges posed for those engaging in sport, region by region, are uncharted.
The focus we have set, in what should have been the 2020 Olympic year, is placed on the
shared challenges and the emergence of solutions that mental performance consultants are
presently undertaking in their work with athletes. The co-authors of this editorial are from
Asia, Europe, and North America. We have published on the topic of Olympic performance
and we are currently immersed in work with Olympic athletes in our respective countries.
What follows is a synthesised commentary.
The reader might posit that embedded in each author’s work, approaches are idiosyncratic
and driven partly by culture and context, which is a correct assumption. For example, some of
us are working from a distance, where others are consulting face-to-face. However, what we
share in common is astounding, despite our respective locations and circumstances. We
present this editorial, structured into three temporal stages: (a) before the 2020 Olympics
were postponed, (b) once the Olympics were postponed, and (c) the path being re-set
toward Tokyo, 2021.
Before Olympic postponement
Life tends to be normal before crisis transitions are experienced, within and outside of highperformance sport. Within high-performance sport, there were initial murmurings of a potential
© 2020 International Society of Sport Psychology
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SPORT AND EXERCISE PSYCHOLOGY
2020, VOL. 18, NO. 3, 269–272
https://doi.org/10.1080/1612197X.2020.1754616virus in several countries, as the contributing authors helped prepare and accompany aspirants
to qualification events. Progressively, there were increasing numbers of people identified with
COVID-19; these heightening numbers were found across continents to the point where athletes experienced cancellations of Olympic qualification events. Initial postponements,
became indefinite postponements.
Athletes were puzzled, and near the centre of these discussions, their mental performance
consultants were seeking to support agile mindsets in their clients. Calendars were changing
and for some countries, centralised programmes began to experience positive cases of athletes
with COVID-19. Within some countries, programmes were temporarily closed. Within other
cases, the athletes were experiencing a much tighter world, comprised of their centralised
lives, though diminishing direct contact with the world outside their national sport centres.
What the athletes from these particular nations shared was a reality of being stifled and
apart from their local communities, including their cities, with limited physical access to
family members and friends. What became apparent for such athletes through social media
was that while they were distancing, competitors from some foreign countries were still able
to train in more normal formats, serving to advantage some and disadvantage others.
National sport organisations and Olympic committees then began to express concerns
regarding the scheduling of the Olympics. Within a fluid global environment, practitioners
were in contact with athletes, many of whom made plans, not only for the Olympics, but
also for after the Olympics. Some planned a continuation into the next Olympic cycle, especially
those in the earlier stages of their national team careers, where others planned to begin
families, return to universities or colleges, or enter into a professional career. Life plans were
in flux, and these extended beyond sport to a broader holistic existence. The stress responses
in the moment included decreased sleep, decreased appetite, increased rumination, loneliness,
and fear that present uncertainty could parlay into the loss of their Olympic moment,
altogether.
Underpinning our collective approaches were strategies that fostered openness in terms of
the concerns the athletes were thinking and feeling. Some of this work varied from in-person to
socially distanced consulting, though our approaches often converged. Openness was in part a
matter of encouraging athletes to express their challenges, fears, frustrations, and uncertainties, first to vent these, and then, to begin to prepare for problem solving as more information
emerged. Openness also meant encouraging a clear flow of communication among the athletes and those who worked with them in their sport organisations. Our belief was that
moments of challenge served to fortify relationships and unify each team’s membership. Openness was especially cathartic when discussions were constructive. This openness was encouraged beyond work with the mental performance consultants, onward to support seeking from
close friends and family members. Openness meant much more than sport focused discussions, onward to those about the basic human conditions, such as healthy living, eating, sleeping, and thinking in one’s general life.
Formal Olympic postponement
Within only a few weeks, Olympic committees were withdrawing from the Games. The domino
effect of these decisions on the part of nations then transitioned to the International Olympic
Committee and the host nation’s decision to cancel the existing date for the 2020 Olympics.
The athletes’ emotional responses varied from relief to questioning of whether a re-scheduled event would take place. Aspiring Olympic athletes are known for their fortitude and resilience. Their visions are set well in advance, whilst technical, tactical, physiological, and
psychological gaps are filled. The athletes then seek to be in their prime to compete on the
270 EDITORIALworld stage during their Olympic moment. However, suddenly, years of hard work, diligence,
and commitment were placed in question – one immediate unknown was whether there
would be a tangible Olympic Games or equivalent at the culmination of the Olympic quadrennia? Further questions followed. What about athletes who were already or nearly qualified for
2020 – would their qualifications remain valid into the future should a new date be calendared?
What should they do in the meantime, while the event was being re-scheduled? How could
they fill their days, typically consumed by training that was built around a time-based goal
of either qualification or Olympic engagement?
Not all responses were negative. Some athletes recognised gaps in their development
toward their Olympic birth or their potential Olympic performance. When athletes train at
high intensity, there is a particular time in a quadrennia, during the final year of the cycle
and associated qualification, where they and those who support them, commit to capitalising
on existing strengths and minimising existing limitations. Gaps always exist in every athlete’s
preparation, and many of the athletes began to reflect upon their current status and pondered
about their existing gaps. Several of us posed the question to these athletes “that if time were
allowed to slow down during the Olympic year, what would they focus on and seek to
enhance?”. These gaps were technical, tactical, analytical, psychological, or physiological.
Several of the athletes also had lingering injuries that compromised their ability to perform
at their best. Such has always been the nature of pushing one’s physical limits.
When the athletes began to compile a list of “gaps” in their current developmental status,
openings were created to explore opportunities not previously available to the athletes. These
opportunities necessitated creativity, as typical training access for some athletes was not
immediately available. For the athletes who remained centralised, more time became available
to delve into gaps and begin to explore these with their coaches, with support from mental
performance consultants. The shift for these athletes was from a feeling of being halted in
their progress, to a yet undefined period of time where constructive problem solving could
ensue. The athletes and those who worked with them could channel energy and strengthen
existing weaknesses, that could in turn, reinforce existing strengths when competition activities
resumed. Hence, if there were ever moments for interventions such as mindfulness, goalsetting, and re-framing, regardless whether these were from video and tele-consulting or inperson, that moment had arrived.
The scenarios focused on “gap searches” above exemplified effective responses to a trying
moment in time; one not all athletes would have capitalised on. Without constructive guidance
and support, athletes finding themselves unforeseeably inactive, or without direction, tend to
suffer from substantive psychological stress and potential mental ill health. What is known
about athletes during crisis transitions from both mental health and career transition scholarship, and in relation to the latter, particularly the injury and retirement scholarship, suggests
that lacking a career direction after years of immersing oneself in an intrinsic high-performance
goal, places athletes in peril. Some of these athletes have also been challenged by burnout syndrome. Personal feelings of alienation and poor coping responses, in this case, compounded by
social isolation, have resulted for some in compromised mental health. Never has there been a
more important moment for mental performance consultants to be accessible to their clients,
and to validate the multitude of mixed thoughts and emotions experienced by Olympic aspirants. Access needed to transcend availability; to the type of encouragement that could best
serve each high-performance athlete.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SPORT AND EXERCISE PSYCHOLOGY 271Paths ahead to Tokyo 2021
As schedules begin to shift and readjust toward the recently scheduled Olympics, now in 2021,
there remains much uncertainty in terms of what Olympic pathways will look like by sport. Will
events become viable in the latter months of 2020, or will formal competitions and qualifications resume, early in 2021? Without a crystal ball, it has become nearly impossible to predict
intermediate steps of a now visible culmination to the current Olympic quadrennia.
There has never been a time when athletes and those who worked with them needed to be
more flexible and creative. The current pandemic offers opportunities that athletes and their
providers must find – they are right under our noses. Lessons gained through autonomy, ingenuity, resilience, life balance, mindfulness, and many more possible skillsets, can, and will, forge
modified, strengthened athletes and enhanced service provisions. Moments of quietness
present openings to reflect, re-evaluate, revise, and reform plans. These plans will undoubtedly
be roads less travelled, but highly valued. The pervasiveness of these life lessons can serve athletes extremely well, as lives are never linear; paths often are meandering, and even circuitous.
Retrospectively, we can all agree that even when one believes one is standing still due to uncertainties, one never is. The human condition is such that people learn from their circumstances,
and they do adapt. The days ahead will provide fascinating data, dialogues, and interventions,
built as a result of what could easily be dismissed as an isolated and unfortunate moment in
human, and also, Olympic history. However, one cannot underestimate the strength of the
human spirit. As for Olympians, they are, and will continue to be forged in (and through)
aversities.




NEW PAPER


COVID-19 and School Psychology: Adaptations and New Directions for the Field
Samuel Y. Songa
, Cixin Wangb, Dorothy L. Espelagec
, Pam Fenningd, and Shane R. Jimersone
a
University of Nevada, Las Vegas; bUniversity of Maryland; c
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; dLoyola University Chicago; e
University of 
California, Santa Barbara
ABSTRACT
The COVID-19 pandemic, beginning January 2020, has already had an unprecedented impact on 
children, families, and schools around the world and in the U.S. The context and impact has varied 
considerably over time, including tremendous variation in schools providing education services 
in-person, via remote/distance learning, and various hybrid configurations involving both 
in-person and remote/distance learning configurations. This special topic section of School 
Psychology Review aims to disseminate innovations and adaptations in research, training, and 
practice that help to inform and advance the field during the COVID-19 pandemic. This introductory 
article offers a brief acknowledgement of the pervasive impact on communities around the world, 
provides a succinct synthesis of several recent research developments focused on key issues 
related to the COVID-19 pandemic and school psychology, as well as the pervasive impact on 
society, and then highlights the first three articles featured in this special topic section focused 
on adaptations and new directions for the field.
IMPACT STATEMENT
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a massive impact on the education of children in communities 
around the world. Contemporary research highlights innovations and adaptations in research, 
training, and practice that help to inform and advance the field of school psychology during and 
following the COVID-19 pandemic. Recent scholarship provides important guidance related to 
important ethical, legal, safety, and technology considerations related to conducting psychoeducational 
assessments. Additionally, recommendations regarding consultation for parents to support young 
children facing challenges with inattention and hyperactivity are discussed.
The 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, described as a “oncein-a-century pandemic” (Gates, 2020), has disrupted 
essential aspects of public, economic, education, and private life around the globe (World Health Organization, 
2020a). Around the world (as of November, 2020) there 
were over 52 million confirmed COVID-19 cases and over 
1.2 million deaths associated with COVID-19 (World 
Health Organization, 2020b). In the U.S. (as of November, 
2020) there were over 10 million confirmed COVID-19 
cases and over 242,000 deaths associated with COVID-19 
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020a). The 
COVID-19 pandemic has already had an unprecedented 
impact on children, families, and schools around the 
world, including the U.S. (John Hopkins University, 2020; 
World Health Organization, 2020a). Presently, there are 
many unknowns regarding when the increasing number 
of cases will be reduced and the spread of COVID-19 will 
be controlled around the world (Scudellari, 2020).
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, most schools in the 
U.S. have been closed for a period of time, while some 
schools continue to remain closed for in-person instruction (Education Week, 2020). A variety of strategies have 
emerged in an attempt to continue to educate and support 
children, including providing education services in-person, remote/distance learning, and various hybrid configurations involving both in-person and remote/distance 
strategies. As education professionals adapt to meet the 
education, social, and emotional needs of students, there 
are a range of services for students that continue to be 
disrupted (for example, food/nutrition, healthcare, extracurricular activities, family/community collaboration, and 
mental health services); thus, reducing the scope of student support services. Additional challenges for children 
during the COVID-19 pandemic include disruption in 
academic learning, social isolation, family financial concerns, greater childhood adverse experiences, trauma, 
grief, and increased screen time (Golberstein et al., 2020). 
Notably, the impact is even greater for students with disabilities (Brandenburg et al., 2020); students from minoritized communities including Black, Indigeneous, culturally 
© 2020 National Association of School Psychologists
CONTACT Samuel Y. Song sam.song@unlv.edu University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Santa Barbara 
https://doi.org/10.1080/2372966X.2020.1852852
KEYWORDS
COVID-19, pandemic, syndemic, 
school psychology, practice, 
education
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received January 22, 2020
Accepted October 9, 2020
INTRODUCTION432 School Psychology Review, 2020, Volume 49, No. 4 DOI: 10.1080/2372966X.2020.1852852
and linguistically diverse; students from families with 
low-income and economic marginalization (LIEM); gender and sexual minoritized youth (Salerno et al., 2020); 
and students experiencing an intersection of oppressive 
systems (VanLancker & Parolin, 2020; Yip, 2020).
This special topic section of School Psychology Review
aims to disseminate innovations and adaptations in 
research, training, and practice that contribute to advancing the field of school psychology. Due to the continuing 
course of the COVID-19 pandemic, articles addressing 
this special topic will be published across several volumes 
to feature information throughout the course of the pandemic. Current research developments on key issues 
related to the pandemic and school psychology are discussed next (the pervasiveness of COVID-19’s impact on 
society requires a selective review). Finally, the three articles pertaining to COVID-19 and school psychology that 
are featured in this issue are briefly described.
RECOGNIZING THE DISPROPORTIONATE 
DELETERIOUS IMPACT ON MINORITIZED 
COMMUNITIES
While the COVID-19 virus indiscriminately affects all 
humans, it is known that individuals from racially and 
ethnically minoritized communities are at increased risk 
of contracting the virus and dying from it (Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, 2020b; Yip, 2020). 
Compared to White persons, COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations and deaths are disproportionately higher among 
American Indian, Alaska Native, Black, and Latinx persons, while Asian persons have disparate numbers of cases 
and hospitalizations (Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 2020b). Excess death statistics collected from 
January 26th, 2020 to October 3rd, 2020 (compared with 
same week deaths in 2015-2019) show the tragic loss of 
life happening most markedly among Latinx persons, followed by American Indian, Alaska Native, Black and Asian 
persons (Rossen et al., 2020). Rossen and colleagues define 
excess deaths “as the number of persons who have died 
from all causes, in excess of the expected number of deaths 
for a given place and time” (p. 1522).
Factors identified that are increasing COVID-19 risk 
and loss of life are structural and systemic racism, discrimination, healthcare access and use, occupation, opportunity gaps (education, income, and wealth), and 
overcrowded housing (Webb, Napoles, & Perez-Stable, 
2020). Students from minoritized communities including 
Black, Indigenous, Latinx, Asian, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, questioning (LGBTQ+) are prone to 
additional bias, trauma, and discriminatory treatment 
during COVID-19 beyond that which they already bear 
due to unjust societal inequities which cut across all 
systems, including employment, insurance, income and 
access to health care, including mental health treatment 
(Gaylord-Harden et al., 2020; Lopez et al., 2020; Poteat 
et al., 2020; Salerno et al., 2020; Tsethlikai et al., 2020; 
Wakabayashi et al., 2020; Yip, 2020). Fueled by racist and 
xenophobic language in the United States including misplaced blame for spreading COVID-19, Asian Americans 
are being unjustly scapegoated and targets of COVIDrelated racist discrimination (Gruber et al., 2020). Further, 
the COVID-19 related school closures may be particularly 
harmful to persons who identify as LGBTQ+, and who 
have intersected minoritized identities as racial ethnic 
minorities, because schools are frequently places where 
mental health services are provided for those experiencing 
homelessness and having an undocumented immigration 
status (Zhang et al., 2020, as cited in Salerno et al., 2020).
INTERLOCKING SYSTEMS OF OPPRESSION & 
SYNDEMIC THEORY
The tragic reality of health disparities is not surprising 
considering the history of systemic oppression and inequities that have plagued the U.S. and have targeted these 
communities since its beginnings. Due to the important 
scholarship of Black females including Crenshaw (1989, 
1991) and the Combahee River Collective (1986) on intersectionality theory, we understand that these factors are 
part of inequitable conditions stemming from interlocking 
systems of oppression (Velez & Spencer, 2018). Indeed, 
these complex cultural ecological systems have interacted 
with COVID-19 and pre-existing health conditions to create a syndemic in the US that clusters around particular 
minoritized populations in complex and unjust ways
(Mendenhall, 2016, 2020; Singer et al., 2017).
While COVID-19 is a global pandemic, the disparate 
patterns documented in the U.S. are not global, they are 
localized to our country due to our unique cultural and 
socio-political context (Mendenhall, 2020). Many other 
countries have not experienced syndemic outcomes during 
the pandemic (Mendenhall, 2016, 2020; Wilson, 2020). 
The reason Mendenhall (2020) explains is because:
pre-existing conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, 
respiratory disorders, systemic racism, mistrust in science and leadership, and a fragmented health-care system have driven the spread and interacted with the virus. 
These synergistic failures have caused more death and 
devastation than many other contexts. (p. 1)
PSYCHOSOCIAL AND MENTAL HEALTH TOLL OF 
THE PANDEMIC
Recent research has pointed to the impact of the pandemic on children and adolescents’ psychological School-Based Mental Health and School Climate 433
functioning. Much of this research has focused on the 
impact of the lockdowns, school closure, and quarantine 
on adjustment, largely in countries who were the hardest 
hit early on, such as China, Italy, Spain, and India. For 
example, Jiao et al. (2020) reported on the results of a 
preliminary study conducted in China by the ChinaEPAUNEPSA working group to understand emotional 
distress among children aged 3 years to 18 years. Rates 
of fear and anxiety were found for youth residing in areas 
that had high rates of infection, while distress was mitigated by media entertainment, reading, and physical 
exercise. Duan et al. (2020) surveyed 359 children and 
3,254 adolescents in China and found that 22% were suffering from depressive symptoms. Further, greater 
depression symptoms were associated with emotion-focused coping, being female, and residing in urban areas, 
whereas less depressive symptoms were associated with 
problem-focused coping.
In a study of the impact of being quarantined in India, 
Saurabh and Ranjan (2020) found that among quarantined children and adolescents, worry (69%), helplessness (66%), and fear (62%) were the most common 
feelings experienced by quarantined youth. In Spain, 
86% of parents indicated changes in their children’s emotional state and behaviors during the quarantine; including difficulty concentrating (77%), boredom (52%), 
irritability (39%), loneliness (31%), and worries (30%) 
(Orgilés et al., 2020). A study of Italian children found 
that one out of four children showed regressive symptoms, demanding physical proximity to parents during 
the night and over 50% showed increased agitation, 
intolerance of rules, and excessive demands (Pisano, 
Galimi, & Cerniglia, 2020). Sharma et al. (2020) identified risk and protective factors for adolescent and 
emerging adult mental health in Nepal, a country whose 
lockdown happened with little warning or preparation. 
Risk factors for mental health challenges included lack 
of mental health services, social media use, lack of 
understanding of lockdown restrictions, and sudden 
work and student life changes. Protective factors 
included cultural acceptance of facemasks, school space 
repurposing, and free counseling. School closures may 
lead to disruption in school based mental health services 
for students, resulting in an increase in mental health 
difficulties among children and adolescents.
There is also increased concern that abuse and violence rates may increase among children and adolescents 
as a result of being quarantined. Humphreys et al. (2020) 
argue that parental stress and anxiety about financial, 
logistical, and existential concerns may result in parents 
managing this anxiety by directing verbal and physical 
abuse toward their children. School closures also mean 
that there are fewer mandatory reporters interacting 
with potentially abused children; thus, this pandemic 
has the potential to lead to reduced detection of 
maltreatment.
RESEARCH, TRAINING, AND PRACTICE IN 
SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY
School psychology has had to adapt across all aspects of 
research, training, and practice. As we remain in the throes 
of consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, assessment, 
intervention, consultation and other forms of service 
delivery have begun to be adapted, and will likely look 
markedly different in the foreseeable future. One of the 
most monumental COVID-19 related changes has been 
the sudden shift to telepsychology following the closure 
of schools, clinics, and community mental health agencies 
across the United States and world (Callahan, 2020). 
Telepsychology, while relatively new to school psychology, 
has been a focus of research and clinical practice for many 
years (Abbott et al., 2008, as cited in Drum & Littleton, 
2014; APA, 2013; Hilty et al., 2003; Maheu et al., 2020). 
McCord et al. (2020) offer empirical research showing 
equivalent telepsychology behavioral and mental health 
outcomes compared with face-to-face services. McCord 
et al. (2020) specifically highlight two separate meta-analyses (Backhaus et al., 2012; Hilty et al., 2013) which lend 
support to telepsychology benefits. Backhaus et al. (2012) 
reported positive results for the efficacy, feasibility, and 
client satisfaction of video psychotherapy, based on 65 
studies. There were four studies in the meta-analysis that 
included children/adolescents and three incorporating 
family therapy. Only 23/42 reported race/ethnicity data 
and only three studies evaluated video psychotherapy with 
a sample that was mostly racial/minority clients. The Hilty 
et al. (2013) meta-analysis included “telepsychiatry” and 
“mental health” as keywords along with others, resulting 
in 35 studies evaluating telemental health published 
between 1996 and 2013. There were seven studies specific 
to children and adolescents, while six focused on populations that are culturally and linguistically diverse. Hilty 
and colleagues concluded that their meta-analysis showed 
that telemental health outcomes were equivalent to faceto-face services provided with different client populations 
and concerns, including children and adolescents, across 
multiple settings (i.e., home and emergency settings). Hilty 
and colleagues stressed the importance of providing treatment in the client’s primary language. They also stressed 
more rigorous study designs and research and policy questions centered on race, ethnicity, culture and language, 
along with other key considerations (i.e., geography, psychological diagnosis).434 School Psychology Review, 2020, Volume 49, No. 4 DOI: 10.1080/2372966X.2020.1852852
SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY CONTEXTUAL 
CONSIDERATIONS
The existing literature reveals the efficacy of telepsychology 
in service provision (Backhaus et al., 2012; Hilty et al., 2013; 
McCord et al., 2020).The professional psychology field, in 
general, is rapidly advancing in developing measurable 
telepsychology competencies deemed necessary for ethical 
and legal telepsychology practice. In 2013, APA developed 
guidelines for telepsychology (APA, 2013). More recently, 
a professional competency framework has been put forth 
to guide telebehavioral health across multiple behavioral 
health specialties in addition to professional psychology 
referred to as the CTiBS TBH Framework (Maheu et al., 
2020). Relatedly, the Consolidated Model for Telepsychology 
Practice compiled from multiple state (Ohio Psychological 
Association), national (APA) and international (Australian 
Psychological Society, New Zealand Psychologists Board, 
Ontario Psychological Association) guidelines has been 
recently created (McCord et al., 2020). With these advances 
come a call to consider how telepsychology can apply to 
school psychology practice. McCord et al. (2020) argue that 
more understanding of telepsychology is needed with different developmental ages and in school settings. Given 
that most school psychologists work in schools, how telepsychology works with children and adolescents in schools 
is particularly germane. For example, school psychologists 
must contend with ethical, legal and practice issues that 
may be similar to those in related applied psychology fields 
and perhaps different, given that many school psychologists 
work in schools where there are provisions such as FERPA 
and federal laws driven by the United States DOE. Further, 
school psychologists spend substantive time doing assessment and using data to make special education eligibility 
determination that might be more difficult to transition to 
in a virtual environment compared to teletherapy (Wright 
et al., 2020). Testing and assessment conditions in an online 
environment may not be equivalent to standardization procedures, calling into question the utility of some findings 
(Farmer et al., in press; Wright et al., 2020), and highlighting the need for further research to inform the interpretation and use of these measures.
One of the most salient issues is that of maintaining 
client privacy when delivering remote services, such as 
concerns about who is in the room during sessions, security of electronic communications and handling patient 
records consistent with HIPAA regulations (McCord et al., 
2020). Due to COVID-19 being declared a national health 
emergency, the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at the 
Department of Health and Human Services (OCR, 2020) 
has relaxed HIPAA compliance guidelines for health care 
providers, including psychologists. Still issues of privacy 
and confidentiality remain, such as when services are 
being delivered in the child or adolescents home setting, 
where family members, siblings and others may be present.
Legal and ethical issues related to telepsychology services, such as practicing across state lines, having a protocol when there are concerns about suicide risk and 
ensuring that a comprehensive intake assessment can be 
conducted when there is not access to traditional paper 
and pencil tools are issues that have been raised over the 
years and remain today (Hilty et al., 2018).
School psychologists are ethically required to serve all 
children and adolescents and to take a social justice lens in 
doing so (NASP, 2020). The abrupt change to online learning illuminated the vast inequities in access to technology 
(Correia, 2020). Therefore, school psychologists must carefully consider and advocate for students to have equitable 
access to telepsychology resources and have adequate technology tools, such as computers, laptops, bandwidth and 
other forms of technology to access instruction. 
Unfortunately, as discussed previously, structural racism 
and other forms of interlocking oppression precludes equitable access for students and families who hold minoritized 
identities (e.g., Salerno et al., 2020; Webb et al., 2020). 
School psychologists must help to promote equity with 
respect to access to adequate mental health/social emotional support and proper diagnosis and assessment, which 
is not occurring presently and is influenced by long-standing racism, bias and related inequities (e.g., Combahee 
River Collective, 2015; Crenshaw, 1989; Sullivan et al., 2020).
SPECIAL TOPIC CONTRIBUTIONS
Despite the abrupt changes described above, school psychology is well-equipped to address the changing nature 
of research, training, and practice. This special topic aims 
to disseminate such innovations and adaptations in 
research, training, and practice that will inform and 
advance the field. Due to the nature of the pandemic, this 
special topic section will be published across several volumes to disseminate projects in various stages over the 
course of the pandemic. In this issue, three articles address 
various facets of assessment and mental health outcomes.
Two articles address assessment issues during the pandemic. First, Stifel et al. (2020), Assessment during the 
COVID-19 Pandemic: Ethical, Legal, and Safety Considerations 
Moving Forward, delineate important ethical, legal, and 
safety considerations when conducting assessments during 
the pandemic. The authors first elucidate the complex issues 
for school psychologists to consider when conducting assessments based on the extant literature (Farmer et al., in press), 
which includes the international literature. Next, they provide a recommended protocol for conducting assessments 
during the pandemic ethically, legally, and safely.School-Based Mental Health and School Climate 435
Next is a research brief by Aspiranti et al. (2020), 
Comparing Paper and Tablet Modalities of Math Assessment 
for Multiplication and Addition, examined technologyversus paper-based curriculum based measurement 
(CBM) modalities for math across two single-case multielement studies. The findings from this study suggest 
that CBM modalities cannot be used interchangeably and 
begin to document the disparities between paper- and 
tablet-based assessment tools. Notably, paper-based format benefited students from low-income and economically marginalized contexts, thus raising interesting 
considerations for future research and practice.
The third article, by Wendel et al. (2020), The 
Association Between Child ADHD Symptoms and Changes 
in Parental Involvement in Kindergarten Children’s 
Learning During COVID-19, examined changes to parent 
involvement and child behavior (e.g., ADHD symptoms) 
among four- and five-year-old children and their parents 
before and during COVID-19 pandemic. Data were collected prior to COVID-19 in December 2019/January 
2020 and again several months into remote learning in 
May/June of 2020. Results indicated that parents’ ratings 
of their children’s ADHD symptoms increased from prior 
to COVID-19 and during COVID-19. There were few 
changes to parents’ educational involvement. However, 
parents’ beliefs about their responsibility to be involved 
in their children’s learning changed and varied for boys 
and girls. These results suggest that COVID-19 may have 
a deleterious effect on children’s inattention and hyperactivity. While there are limitations to the study, the 
results do suggest that school psychologists can support 
parents by providing specific strategies to increase structure and to incorporate healthy routines (e.g., physical 
activity) into the day.
Overall, these three articles highlight important 
information for school psychologists to consider as we 
continue to adapt and adjust to meet the needs of children, staff, and families within the context of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Psychoeducational assessment 
should be conducted after the careful consideration of 
ethical, legal, and safety issues (Stifel et al., 2020). 
Similarly, math CBMs conducted with technology 
should not be assumed to be equivalent to paper-methods (Aspiranti et al., 2020). Children’s inattention and 
hyperactivity appears to be negatively affected during 
the pandemic suggesting that additional parent consultation is likely warranted (Wendel et al., 2020). While 
further scholarship is needed to address many topics 
related to COVID-19 and supporting the education, 
learning, adjustment, and well-being of students; these 
articles contribute to school psychology’s emerging dialogue on the COVID-19 global pandemic and national 
syndemic




NEW PAPER




IJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
35
Covid-19 and the State of Research from the Perspective of Psychology
Kalsoom Nawaz* Hafiza Anum Saeed** and Tanveer Aslam Sajeel***
*Riphah International University, Lahore, Pakistan
**Riphah International University, Lahore, Pakistan
***Clinical Psychologist, Amina Abdullah Hospital, Deplapur, Okara, Pakistan
Corresponding author Email: kalsoombutt35@gmail.com
Abstract
This study aims to identify the current psychological research status from the perspective of 
COVID-19; for so doing, we extracted the data from the Scopus database. In order to outline 
the trends in terms of the number of publications, bibliographic coupling, and coauthorships, we used the constructed intellectual structure of the research with the help of 
VoS Viewer of Software. Besides, based on our understating of the content of published 
literature, we also presented some suggestions for practitioners and future researchers. 
Keywords: COVID-19; Bibliometric Analysis; Bibliographic Coupling; Psychological 
Interventions
To cite this document
Nawaz, K, Saeed, A, H, & Sajeel, A, T. (2020). Covid-19 and the State of Research from the Perspective 
of Psychology. International Journal of Business and Psychology, 2(1), 35–44.
INTRODUCTION 
Covid-19, originated from Wuhan, China, in December 2019, has become one of the most 
significant health and economic challenges for governments all around the world. The world health 
organizations have confirmed that the global epidemic in January 2020, and to deterrent the spread 
of Covid-19, most countries have already announced a complete lockdown (Jiloha, 2020). Besides, 
the government, research institutes, and funding agencies are spending a huge some to find a cure 
for Covid-19. In connection to this, world health organization, in February 2020, assessed the 
existing level of research and information on COVID-19. Resultantly, the WHO issued a call to 
global research communities to prioritize the funding on Covid-19 that can help to cure this 
pandemic. World health organization in a meeting (Organization, 2020) held in its headquarter in 
February 2020 identified the following area of the focus for research.
1) "Mobilize study on the rapid evaluation of treatment for use at the Community level
International Journal of Business and Psychology
Vol.2 Issue 1IJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
36
2) Evaluate the available data immediately to find out what level of treatment strategies are 
most effective from China and elsewhere
3) Evaluate the impact of adjunctive and supportive therapies as fast as possible
4) Optimize the use of protective equipment and other interventions to avoid and manage 
infections in the healthcare and community environments
5) Review the current information to classify animal host(s), to avoid continued spillover and 
better understand the transmissibility of the virus in various contexts over time, disease 
frequency and who is more vulnerable to infection
6) Review all evidence available to identify animal host(s), to prevent continued spillover and 
to better understand the virus transmissibility in different contexts over time, the severity of 
disease and who is more susceptible to infection
7) Accelerate the evaluation of investigational therapeutics and vaccines by using “Master 
Protocols
8) Maintain a high degree of communication and interaction among funders so that critical 
research is implemented
9) Broadly and rapidly share virus materials, clinical samples, and data for immediate public 
health purposes". 
Our study aims at supporting the 8th research agenda regarding sharing the current and 
emerging trends in research on Covid-19. Numerous studies have been published on COVID-19 
covering different aspects such as medications, Immunology and Microbiology, Biochemistry, 
Genetics, and Molecular Biology, Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Pharmaceutics. However, very 
less is research about the psychological aspect and the consequences of Covid-19. On the early basis 
COVID-19 data, we conclude that it connects to psychiatric and neuropsychiatric conditions such 
as fatigue, stress, feeling of loneliness, sleep disorders, depression, anxiety, psychological distress, 
(Mazza et al., 2020), post-traumatic stress disorder, cognitive impairment, altered consciousness, 
delirium. (Rogers et al., 2020). Therefore, this study aims to review and analyze the bibliometric 
data on the research related to the psychological aspect to support the WHO initiative to curb and 
cure the aftermath of this pandemic. 
Bibliometric is the quantitative study of investigating the trends and trajectories in scientific 
communication, we believe, our analysis of the research on COVID-19 can help the researchers to 
appreciate the existing research and prepare the future research design and directions.
First, the work presents a trend of publication and citation relating December 2019-May 
2020. Secondly, analyze the worldwide perception of the countries with the maximum number of 
articles and citations. Third, the top productive universities and institutes are enlisted. Fourth, the 
leading journals are identified. Fifth, the most prolific authors are identified based on the numeral 
publications and citations in terms of COVID-19 research. The study did bibliometric coupling and 
co-citation analysis to see how these journals, countries, and authors related to each other. Lastly, 
based on the reviews of the data obtained, we also suggest some future research agenda for COVID19 research from the perspective of psychology.
The critical participation of this research is that it offers a general idea of the famous 
countries, journals, most occurring keywords, and future research agendas for COVID-19 research 
from the perspective of psychology. This study can assist the editorial team of the journals to 
recognize the probable area of growth for future research..
METHOD 
Scopus database was used to search the research publications on Covid-19. Scopus Database 
is one of the most extensive peer-reviewed research repositories in the Social Sciences. The IJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
37
repository is also accessed and acknowledged for empirical and quantitative research (Donthu et al., 
2020). The following criteria of research consist of these entitle: “COVID-19”, “SARS-CoV-2”, 
“severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, “2019-nCoV,” and “2019 new coronavirus, and 
searched for it in the “Title, abstract, keywords” option the search results showed 674 publications 
since December 2019. 
The bibliometric technique is used to evaluate the collected statistics. Bibliometric is a 
research field of library and information science (Bar-Ilan, 2008) that studies the bibliometric stuff 
with a quantitative method (Broadus, 1987). This technique is instrumental in classifying and 
analyzing the general trend of a specific issue, such as journal, research area, or a country (Bonilla 
et al., 2015; Martínez-López et al., 2018). In literature, bibliometric studies have been used to 
determine the significance of a subject (Laengle et al., 2017) the role of journals (Amiguet et al., 
2017) educational institutes (Martínez-López et al., 2018) and country (Bonilla et al., 2015). 
This work uses the VOS Viewer to map the bibliographical material graphically (Van Eck 
and Waltman, 2010). The VOS viewer takes the bibliographic data as input and converts it as output 
into the form graphs. The research uses other bibliometric methods, including the BC and co-citing 
of the author's keywords. BC (Kessler, 1963) happens when two documents discuss the same third 
document (i.e., Studies A and B, usually known as Studies C). Co-citation takes place when the 
same three texts cite two publications (studies A and B of the C study). 
Moreover, the concurrence of keywords analyses the keywords that appear more frequently 
in the same papers. The following prominent bibliographic studies (e.g., Donthu et al., 2020), this 
study uses BC for authors and institutions and co-citation for documents and journals. The cooccurrence of keywords is used to classify the keywords under general topics.
RESULTS 
The search in the Scopus database showed that there are a total of 674 documents related to 
COVID-19 and psychology. A brief content analysis of these articles revealed that most of the 
publications were focused on the impact of COVID-19 on psychological issues. However, very rare 
studies have discussed the suggestions or interventions to cope with this pandemic. Thus, in this 
study, we endeavor to address this issue while providing a holistic view of the psychological research 
till 26th July 2020.
Leading Countries in COVID-19 
Since the COVID-19 affected almost all of the countries in the world, thus, to cope up with 
this pandemic, several countries from around the globe contributed to spread awareness through 
publication of their research work. In the following table we categorized the countries with the 
greatest number of. These results might help the future researchers to see what the most productive 
and impactful countries in terms of psychological research in the perspective of COVID-19 are. 
Following table presents the results of the countries that have contributed more than 10 publications 
till July 26, 2020.IJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
38
Table 1: The most productive countries
Rank Country Publications
1. United States 196
2. United Kingdom 84
3. China 51
4. Canada 36
5. Australia 32
6. Italy 31
7. Ireland 27
8. Spain 27
9. France 25
10. India 22
It is of great interest to understand what the networking connection among the 
countries is publishing research on COVID-19. For so doing, we utilized VoS Viewer of 
Software and constructed the networking structure in terms of bibliometric coupling. 
Bibliographic coupling occurs when two documents cite a third study commonly. Regarding 
countries, bibliometric coupling occurs when a document from two different countries cite 
the third document in their publications. This shows how other countries use similar
literature in their publications. 
Figure 1: BC of countriesIJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
39
Figure 1 represents bibliographic coupling among the countries based on five 
clusters represented with different colors (Green, red, blue, yellow, and purple). The US has 
strong bibliographic coupling. The bigger circle in size shows the stronger bibliographic 
coupling. The countries in green color clusters tend to have strong bibliographic coupling, 
and the same is the case with other color clusters.
While having bibliographic coupling on the country level, this question might loom 
around how are the authors from different countries networked in terms of co-authorship? 
We address this issue by developing the networking diagram of co-authorship at the country 
level 
While having the bibliographic coupling on the country level, this question might 
loom around how the authors from different countries networked in terms of co-authorship 
are? We address this issue by developing the networking diagram of co-authorship at the 
country level. 
Table 2: Co-Authorship among Countries
 No Country Documents Citations Total Link Strength
1. United States 196 177 14557
2. United Kingdom 84 186 12166
3. China 51 176 7396
4. Canada 37 74 7630
5. Australia 33 104 6369
6. Italy 31 57 4410
7. Ireland 27 7 1927
8. Spain 27 31 3623
9. France 25 14 1632
10. India 22 128 1299
Table 2 shows the co-authorship among Top 10 countries. It indicates that two similar 
documents are bibliographically coupled for the common one or more documents. There 
are twelve clusters found in different colors. The biggest circle in size showed the strongest 
co-authorship with the respective countries.
Cluster 1 is represented with blue color, and It shows a strong co-authorship among 
Argentina, Botswana, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, 
Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto Rico, Uruguay. Cluster 2 is represented with 
Maroon color, and It comprises of India, Indonesia, Iran, Lebanon, News Zeeland, Nigeria, 
Pakistan, Portugal, Serbia, Singapore, Tunisia. The blue color cluster encompasses 
Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, China, Finland, Hong Kong, Japan, Macau, Philippines, 
Russia federation. The countries present in similar clusters tend to have strong coauthorships. IJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
40
Figure 3: Co-Authorship among Countries
Top Journals 
One of the other important aspects of bibliographic coupling is to find out the 
journals that publish most frequently on Psychology research from the perspective of 
COVID-19. Following table 3 represented the journal that has published 10 or more than 10 
papers on COVID-19 in the first seven months, i.e., 26h
July 2020. Psychological Trauma 
Theory Research Practice and Policy remains the most productive journal in terms of a 
number of 139 publications on COVID-19 and in the aspects of Psychology while the Irish 
Journal of Psychological Medicine remains the 2nd most productive with 32 publications. 
We can suggest from these facts that future researchers should consult these journals for 
their seminal work.
Table 3: Top Journals
No Journal Title Publication 
1. Psychological Trauma Theory Research Practice And Policy 139
2. Irish Journal Of Psychological Medicine 32
3. Social Anthropology 30
4. Asian Journal Of Psychiatry 26
5. Counselling Psychology Quarterly 25
6. Journal Of Loss And Trauma 17
7. Journal Of Humanistic Psychology 15
8. Journal Of Affective Disorders 14
9. Nature Human Behaviour 14
10. Journal Of Psychotherapy Integration 13IJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
41
Figure 3: Bibliographic coupling of journals 
 
Co-Occurrence of keywords
Table 4 and figure 4 display the most occurring keywords using till July 26, 2020, in 
published documents. Co-Occurrence of keywords that frequently occur in the studied 
documents. Given the psychological aspect, an infectious covid-19 virus causes mental 
health problems such as depression, anxiety, stress, and post-traumatic stress disorder. The 
future research trends around in these most co-occurring words to explore more about this 
phenomenon.
Table 4: Most occurring Keywords
No Keywords occurrences Total link strength
1 Covid-19 365 475
2 Pandemic 94 187
3 Coronavirus 88 163
4 Mental health 83 155
5 Anxiety 40 109
6 Trauma 34 56
7 Depression 27 80
8 Stress 25 72
9 Covid-19 pandemic 16 16
10 PTSD 16 30IJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
42
. 
Figure 4: Occurrence of Keywords 
DISCUSSION AND PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERVENTIONS 
Evidence suggests that COVID-19 has consequences for the patient, families, and 
society. The scientist and biologist are continuing their efforts to find the cure to this 
pandemic; the social and psychological aspects should also be not ignored. However, since 
most of the resources are devoted and occupied for biomedical research, hence; the current 
state of psychology research is not up to the mark. Our bibliometric analysis on the 
psychological research in the first seven months of this pandemic substantiated this claim. 
This bibliometric analysis showed that there are very few studies on the psychological 
consequences of COVID-19. In keeping this view, researchers should come forward to help 
formulate the interventions. Practical and theoretical research should be initiated to cope 
with the crisis and to strengthen the mental and psychological health. Psychological cries 
should be taken as public health emergencies. The cooperation between community health 
services and mental-health-care institutions should be decoupled. Some studies from the 
past on SARS have confirmed that individuals who have experienced public health 
emergencies still have varying degrees of stress disorders, even after the event is over, or 
they have been cured and discharged from hospital, indicating these individuals should not 
be ignored (Cheng et al., 2004). There is a dire need for systematic studies on the IJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
43
interventions to cope up the psychological problems. Hence, here we present some 
suggestions for the practitioners and researchers to consider formulating psychological 
intervention or conducting psychological research.
The immediate support system should be established in the early weeks of the novel 
coronavirus. Awareness programs should be conducted through devices such as television, 
radio, mobile phone and internet resources. There should be audio, video highlighted 
message that attracts the attention of the community. Programs based on psycho-education 
of covid-19, disease course, precautionary measures, symptoms, and management. All 
programs telecast with the healthcare and mental health professionals' team, expert's 
interviews, or messages regarding disease course, the severity of clinical symptoms, place 
of treatment and other factors to classify individuals who need management. Interventions 
should be addressed to most venerable groups of communities such as children, elderly and 
immigrant workers. 
Universities and institutes should have some online courses and platforms to provide 
counseling services to the patients and their family members. The people with a suspected 
infection disease who are underneath isolation or at home, community psychological health 
services should give primary mental health concerned. Although, in any case, since of 
complicated work strategies, the heavy burden of workloads, and insufficient training in 
psychiatry or clinical psychology, community health services do not always know how to 
diminish the psychological distress of patients. A specialized team is comprising mental 
health services in dealing with emotional distress and other psychological disorders caused 
by epidemics and further public health emergencies. 
Our experience is that some of the COVID-19 survivors will be prone to bear 
negative behavioral and emotional responses such as grievance, bitterness, anger and fear 
that needed to be dealt in a sensitive way. For instance, tailor-made psychological screening, 
such as a personal inquiry and invitation for the need for psychological consultation rather 
than arbitrarily distributing the postal questionnaires, would be much appropriate and 
receptive for counseling. In addition, when facing a possible future outbreak, psychological 
preparation such as stress inoculation (Meichenbaum, 1993) may be needed to strengthen 
the sense of social support, reduce the associated social discrimination, facilitate the use of 
socially endorsed communication channels without reducing the amount of contact, 
brainstorm and share the possible coping, educate and adopt some realistic threat appraisal 
and booster the morale among the staff. 
Second, in the psychological assessment for the COVID-19 survivors, clinicians 
should include social support, negative appraisal (perceived impacts), positive appraisal 
(post-traumatic growth) and self-efficacy, which may be essential parameters for 
monitoring the ongoing psychological and perceived physical health of COVID-19 
survivors. 
Third, these significant psychosocial correlates may embed essential values in the 
clinical intervention for the COVID-19 survivors. For instance, given the significant role of 
negative appraisal in the outcomes, cognitive techniques such as comparing with the 
disadvantages and reappraising the disastrous fears might be appropriate when particular IJBPSY | Nawaz K., et al., 2020
44
maladaptive thinking or beliefs are elicited. Further, the clinicians should not only actively 
inquire about the impacts of COVID-19 but also elicit and educate various coping efforts 
that may booster the coping confidence and reinforce their perceived ability to cope with 
the impacts. Also, allowing the survivors to review or reiterate the personal gain and growth 
from the traumatic experience may create positive meaning, reframe the impacts and 
possibly alleviate their distress




NEW PAPER



fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 03 September 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01924
Edited by:
Ilhan Ozturk,
Çag University, Turkey ˘
Reviewed by:
Jasim Tariq,
Iqra University, Pakistan
Muhammad Usman,
Jiangsu University, China
*Correspondence:
Khurram Shehzad
khurramscholar64@hotmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Organizational Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 26 May 2020
Accepted: 13 July 2020
Published: 03 September 2020
Citation:
Shehzad K, Xiaoxing L, Arif M,
Rehman KU and Ilyas M (2020)
Investigating the Psychology
of Financial Markets During COVID-19
Era: A Case Study of the US
and European Markets.
Front. Psychol. 11:1924.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01924
Investigating the Psychology of
Financial Markets During COVID-19
Era: A Case Study of the US and
European Markets
Khurram Shehzad1
*, Liu Xiaoxing1
, Muhammad Arif2
, Khaliq Ur Rehman3 and
Muhammad Ilyas2
1 School of Economics and Management, Southeast University, Nanjing, China, 2 School of Economics and Finance, Xi’an
Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, 3 School of Management, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China
The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has imperatively shaken the behavior of the global
financial markets. This study estimated the impact of COVID-19 on the behavior of the
financial markets of Europe and the US. The results revealed that the returns of the
S&P 500 index have been greatly affected by a lockdown in the US owing to COVID-19.
However, the health crisis generated due to the novel coronavirus significantly decreased
the stock returns of the Nasdaq Composite index. The results also showed that the
economic crisis generated from the pandemic in Spain has had more impact on the
IBEX 35 as compared to the health crisis itself. On the other hand, in the long-run, Italy’s
stock markets are more affected by the health crisis as contrasted with the economic
crisis, while, in the short-run, both lockdown conditions and economic instability lower
the stock returns of FTSE MIB. The UK stock markets witnessed that in the short-run,
deficiency of health management systems imperatively damaged the stock returns of the
London Stock Exchange. The investigation revealed that deficiency of health systems
and lockdown conditions have imperatively damaged the structure of financial markets,
inferring that sustainable development of these nations is at risk due to COVID-19. The
study suggested that governments should allocate more of their budget to the health
sector to overcome a health crisis in the future.
Keywords: COVID-19, financial stability, financial markets psychology, sustainable development, global
development, health crisis, economic crisis
INTRODUCTION
Historically, countries affected by a pandemic or epidemic that have seen large loss of
life also see an impact within the economy and in their financial markets; a specific
example would be the spread of Ebola disease in 2013–2016, which caused a loss of 53
billion dollars in the US (Fernandes, 2020). However, the potential damages of the current
virus are still largely unknown. Significantly, the Coronavirus (COVID-19) infection disease
was first reported in Wuhan on December 31, 2019 and spread rapidly to almost the
whole world within the next few months (Albulescu, 2020). Compared to Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), COVID-19 is more contagious, which has been indicated by
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 2
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
a different fatality rate1
. COVID-19 has infected 1,865,413
individuals, and 110,008 deaths had been documented
throughout the globe until mid-April 2020 (Financial Times,
2020). In order to eradicate this pandemic, the World Health
Organization (WHO) recommended maintaining social distance,
which generated the severe lockdown situation on the globe
(WHO, 2020). Accordingly, the economic circle in the whole
world has been disturbed. Notably, the sale of Online Travel
Agencies (OTAs), Airlines, and Hotels has unexpectedly declined
(World Economic Forum, 2020). Even oil prices have nosedived
due to the sudden outbreak of this pandemic (EIA, 2020). Due
to globalization, the current coronavirus outbreak will aggravate
the economic condition, which can pave the way toward financial
meltdown (Huang et al., 2020). This pandemic has caused a
severe psychological impact on the economy while agitating
service industries and financial markets.
Moreover, the coronavirus outbreak has severely affected the
financial markets while declining the value of stock index up to
10% in 1 day (Daube, 2020). Surprisingly, news or specific events
can fluctuate stock values (Shehzad and Sohail, 2018). Figure 1
revealed the market value in the European, American, Chinese,
and Hong Kong markets from January 1, 2020–March 18, 2020.
The period is divided into three rounds for comparison purposes;
the first time-lagged is from January 1, 2020 to January 23, 2020,
the second time-lagged is from January 23 to March 6, and the
third time-lagged denoted the period of March 6, 2020 to March
18, 2020. The results showed that the market values of these
indices significantly declined in the third time-lagged as COVID19 approached its peak in western countries. Spain’s stock market
share value was decreased by 27.3% in the third time-lagged.
COVID-19 tremendously shrank Greece stock markets.
Moreover, Figure 2 illustrates the volatility index (VIX) from
January 2005–March 2020. It denotes that the world has faced
severe financial crises in 2007–2009. The stock markets collapsed,
and the economies went through enormous pressure. A similar
scenario has been built up during the global pandemic COVID19. The stock market variance is at its highest for the second time
after the Global Financial Crises (GFC).
In this regard, the novel coronavirus’s impact is also
detrimental, and pandemic behavior is unknown, so its effect
on the stock return can last longer. Relevant to this, the US
stock volatility has been agitated due to the enormous spread
of this pandemic resulting in severe economic crisis (Sharif
et al., 2020). In such circumstances, it is quite significant to
analyze coronavirus short-term and long-term impacts on the
advanced countries’ stock return. This investigation argued
that as the confirmed patients of novel coronavirus increase,
the lockdown conditions becomes stricter, which lead to a
significant economic crisis and shocked the economic stability
of one’s nations. Moreover, deaths that befell as a result of novel
coronavirus specified the deficiency of health facilities, which had
caused a substantial health crisis. Particularly, this examination
analyzed the effects of the economic and health crisis due to the
novel coronavirus on the behavior of financial markets of the
1The SARS fatality rate was 11% while the fatality rate by novel coronavirus is 4%
all around the globe.
United States (US), Germany, United Kingdom (UK), Italy, and
Spain for the period of February 10, 2020 to April 9, 2020.
This study elucidates the effects by executing a Nonlinear Autoregressive Distributed lagged (NARDL) model. This
investigation provides remarkable policies on how to handle
the impacts of COVID-19 on the financial market and
answers the momentous queries of the researchers, policymakers,
Government officials, and academicians, e.g., firstly, does
COVID-19 have a non-linear impact on financial markets’
behavior? Secondly, does the health crisis or economic instability
generated by COVID-19 have a more significant impact on the
S&P 500 index? Thirdly, does the Nasdaq Composite index or
S&P 500 index respond more critically to the COVID-19 crisis?
Fourthly, does the economic crisis generated by COVID-19 or
the health crisis have a more significant impact on stock returns?
Fifthly, how does this suspended circle of economy, due to
lockdown, begin again? According to the author’s best knowledge,
this is the first study that examines the asymmetrical impact
of COVID-19 on the psychology of stock markets of mostly
infected nations of the world. Firstly, this project ascertained
the stationary level of study variables and discovered that all the
variables are stationary at I(0) and I(1), and no one is stationary
at I(2). Hence, a Non-linear version of the Autoregressive
Distributed Lag (ARDL) model can be applied.
DATA AND METHODOLOGY
Data
This study utilized the daily data of the number of confirmed
patients and deaths due to COVID-19 and stock markets of
the US, Spain, Italy, Germany, and the UK, from the period of
February 10, 2020–April 9, 2020. This study has taken the data
from the database of Yahoo Finance and the European Center
for Disease Control and Prevention. Further, this investigation
analyzed the daily returns of IBEX 35, FTSE MIB, DAX 30, and
London Stock Exchange (LSE) for the nomination of Spain, Italy,
Germany, and the UK. However, S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite
Index represents the US.
Methodology
This investigation utilized each stock market’s daily returns as
the dependent variable and confirmed cases and deaths as the
independent variable. The daily returns used in this study are
computed as follows (Syllignakis and Kouretas, 2011; Shehzad
and Sohail, 2018),
Rti = (ln(CSti/CSt−1i))∗
100 (1)
here Rti, CSt
, and CSt−1 denote the return value at time t, closing
price at time t, and previous day closing price at time t, for a
stock market i, respectively. The linear association between these
variables can be defined as;
1SPRt = β0 + β1USCt + β2USDt + εt (2)
1NSRt = β0 + β1USCt + β2USDt + εt (3)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 3
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
FIGURE 1 | Deterioration in the stock markets owing to novel coronavirus.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 4
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
FIGURE 2 | Variations in VIX due to Global Financial Crisis 2007–2009 and
COVID-19 Crisis.
1IBERt = β0 + β1SPCt + β2SPDt + εt (4)
1FTMRt = β0 + β1ITLCt + β2ITLDt + εt (5)
1DAXRt = β0 + β1GERCt + β2GERDt + εt (6)
1LSERt = β0 + β1UKCt + β2UKDt + εt (7)
where 1 signifies the first difference and β0β1β2 are the
independent parameters. However, NSR, SPR, IBER, FTMR,
DAXR, and LSER defines the return values of the Nasdaq
Composite index, S&P 500, IBEX 35, FTSE MIB, DAX 30,
and London Stock Exchange, respectively. Moreover, USC, SPC,
ITLC, GERC, and UKC indicate the confirmed cases of COVID19 in the US, Spain, Italy, Germany, and the UK, respectively.
Further, USD, SPD, ITLD, GERD, and UKD refer to confirmed
deaths due to COVID-19 in the US, Spain, Italy, Germany, and
the UK, respectively.
To ascertain the short- and long-run asymmetries, this
study employed the Non-Linear Autoregressive Distributed Lag
(NARDL) model introduced by Shin et al. (2014). This model
performs best with a small number of observations and can be
applied on a mixed level of stationary data, i.e., I (0) and I(1). It
evaluates the non-linearity and cointegration between variables
in one equation; and shared the short-run variations to long-run
asymmetries after taking the long-run parameters into account
(Shin et al., 2014). The NARDL model is the extended form of
the ARDL (Pesaran et al., 2001) model; hence, the full form of
NARDL model for each stock market can be specified as,
1SPRt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1SPRt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1USC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1USC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1USD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1USD−
t−1 + γ1
SPRt−i + γ2aUSC+
t−1 + γ2bUSC−
t−1 + γ3aUSD+
t−1 + γ3b
USD−
t−1 + µt (8)
1NSRt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1NSRt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1USC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1USC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1USD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
USD−
t−1 + γ1NSRt−i + γ2aUSC+
t−1 + γ2bUSC−
t−1 + γ3a
USD+
t−1 + γ3bUSD−
t−1 + µt (9)
1IBERt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1IBERt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1SPC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1SPC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1SPD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
SPD−
t−1 + γ1IBERt−i + γ2aSPC+
t−1 + γ2bSPC−
t−1 + γ3a
SPD+
t−1 + γ3bSPD−
t−1 + µt (10)
1FTMRt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1FTMRt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1ITLC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1ITLC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1ITLD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
ITLD−
t−1 + γ1FTMRt−i + γ2aITLC+
t−1 + γ2b
ITLC−
t−1 + γ3a
ITLD+
t−1 + γ3b
ITLD−
t−1 + µt (11)
1DAXRt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1DAXRt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1GERC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1GERC−
t−1 + ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1GERD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
GERD−
t−1 + γ1DAXRt−i + γ2aGERC+
t−1 + γ2bGERC−
t−1 + γ3a
GERD+
t−1 + γ3bGERD−
t−1 + µt (12)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 5
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
1LSERt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1LSERt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1UKC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1UKC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1UKD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
UKD−
t−1 + γ1LSERt−i + γ2aUKC+
t−1 + γ2bUKC−
t−1 + γ3a
UKD+
t−1 + γ3bUKD−
t−1 + µt (13)
here ϑ0ϑ1, ϑ2a, ϑ2bϑ3aand ϑ3b are the short-run factors, while
γ1, γ2a, γ2b
,γ3a, and γ3b
indicates the long-run parameters.
Whereas, i symbolizes the number of lag used by the model
based on Akaik Information Criterion and Schwarz Information
Criterion. The above stated equations Eqs 8–13 assumed that
confirmed number of cases and deaths due to COVID-19 have
asymmetrical impact on stock returns.
Thus, USC+
t−1
,USD+
t−1
,SPC+
t−1
, SPD+
t−1
,ITLC+
t−1
,
ITLD+
t−1
,GERC+
t−1
, GERD+
t−1
, UKC+
t−1
, and UKD+
t−1
designates a positive shock, though USC−
t−1
, USD−
t−1
, SPC−
t−1
,
SPD−
t−1
, ITLC−
t−1
, ITLD−
t−1
,GERC−
t−1
, GERD−
t−1
,UKC−
t−1
, and
UKD−
t−1
implies a negative shock for each variable, and it is
computed as follows,
.
+
ti =
Xt
j=1
1.
+
ji =
Xt
j=1
max(1.ji, 0)(14) (14)
.
−
ti =
Xt
j=1
1.
−
ji =
Xt
j=1
min(1.ji, 0)(15) (15)
here .
+
ti delineates the positive shock in a variable i and j denotes
the asymmetric distributive lag. The error correction form for
these factors can be written as follows,
1SPRt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1SPRt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1USC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1USC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1USD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
USD−
t−1 + φ1ECTt−1 + µt (16)
1NSRt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1NSRt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1USC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1USC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1USD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
USD−
t−1 + φ1ECTt−1 + µt (17)
1IBERt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1IBERt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1SPC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1SPC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1SPD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
SPD−
t−1 + φ1ECTt−1 + µt (18)
1FTMRt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1FTMRt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1ITLC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1ITLC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1ITLD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
ITLD−
t−1 + φ1ECTt−1 + µt (19)
1DAXRt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1DAXRt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1GERC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1GERC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1GERD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
GERD−
t−1 + φ1ECTt−1 + µt (20)
1LSERt = ϑ0 + ϑ1
X
p
i=1
1LSERt−1 + ϑ2a
X
p
i=1
1UKC+
t−1+
ϑ2b
X
p
i=1
1UKC−
t−1
ϑ3a
X
p
i=1
1UKD+
t−1 + ϑ3b
X
p
i=1
1
UKD−
t−1 + φ1ECTt−1 + µt (21)
here ECTt−1 directs the error correction term. The long-run
cointegration among variables is examined through the bound
test approach of Pesaran et al. (2001). This method relies on Ftest to evaluate the null hypothesis, H0: γ1 = γ2a = +γ3a = 0.
For this purpose, Pesaran et al. (2001) has defined two bounds,
i.e., upper and lower bound. If the estimated F-statistics are the
higher than upper bound limit then the null hypothesis of no
cointegration is rejected. However, if the projected value of Ftest is lower than lower bound limit then null hypothesis cannot
be rejected; besides, if the value of F-test remains between both
limits then the results are not conclusive. At the end, this project
employed the Wald test to verify the asymmetric long-run, γ
+
2a
γ1
=
γ
−
2b
γ1
,
γ
+
3a
γ1
=
γ
−
3b
γ1
andshort − run
ϑ
+
2a
ϑ1 =
ϑ
−
2b
ϑ1
,
ϑ
+
3a
ϑ1
=
ϑ
−
3b
ϑ1
asymmetric
relationship between study variables.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 6
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
STUDY FINDINGS
The descriptive summary showed, in Table 1, during the COVID19 era, the mean of stock returns is negative. Further, skewness
values of these markets are also negative except LSER with
high kurtosis, which predicts high chances of loss these days.
Table 2 presents the results of the Augmented Dickey-Fuller
(ADF) test (Dickey and Fuller, 1979) and Phillip Perron (PP) test
(Phillips and Perron, 1988). It showed that the study variables
have diverse stationary levels, i.e., I (0) and I (1), and no variable
is cointegrated at I (2).
Bound Test Cointegration Fallouts
The outcomes of the Bound test displayed in Table 3 disclosed
significant statistical evidence of a long-term association between
study variables for each equation. The F-statistics for joint
significance of lagged level parameters are stated as 63.02, 39.11,
5.4, 5.1, 38.2, and 14.03 for Eqs 1–6, respectively. These values
surpass the upper bound limits of Shin et al. (2014), implying
that long-run cointegration exists among economic crisis, health
crisis, and financial markets of each equation.
Long- and Short-Run Asymmetric
Cointegration Reckoning
Table 4 exhibited the upshots of the Wald-test. The statistics
particularized that USC and USD have a non-linear association
with SPR. However, USC revealed short-run asymmetric
affiliation with NSR. Besides, SPD caused an asymmetric
influence on IBER for both long-term and short-term periods,
while SPC possessed short-run asymmetry only. Additionally, the
TABLE 1 | Descriptive statistics.
IBER SPD SPC LSER UKC UKD SPR USC
Mean −0.41737 147.2222 1463.792 −0.08997 621.2083 71.70833 −0.28187 3658.956
Skewness −1.68003 1.687765 1.641313 0.027343 2.392073 3.081854 −0.35422 2.186996
Kurtosis 10.36907 4.166164 4.206693 4.903565 7.778953 11.75376 5.380136 6.389965
Jarque.Bera 196.7798 38.26244 36.69524 10.87966 137.1793 343.8589 17.47298 86.76708
Probability 0 0 0 0.00434 0 0 0.000161 0
USD NR GERC GERD DAXR ITLD ITLC FTMR
Mean 109.3088 −0.18523 1446.396 30.54717 −0.42086 174.9577 1365.254 −0.40245
Skewness 2.927378 −0.53985 1.120857 2.230936 −0.65869 1.232889 1.058817 −2.31595
Kurtosis 10.43888 5.59924 2.573906 7.120135 7.135106 2.868864 2.472667 14.04434
Jarque.Bera 253.9095 22.44518 11.49843 81.45175 41.59309 18.03773 14.08892 424.3192
Probability 0 0.000013 0.003185 0 0 0.000121 0.000872 0
Source: Author’s calculation.
TABLE 2 | Unit root test.
ADF F-statistics PP F-statistics
Variable Level 1st Diff. Level 1st Diff.
DAXR −6.893713*** −8.54426*** −7.057616*** −37.2059****
GERC −1.293963 −3.969976** −0.971366 −14.51473***
GERD −5.935247*** −4.359161*** 3.147762 −6.393867***
FTMR −4.631659 −11.55646*** −9.451458*** −30.1619***
ITLD −1.127702 −4.174362*** −0.400067 −11.35456***
ITLC −1.300231 −5.849862** −0.488626 −8.372171***
IBER −4.27056 −9.985616*** −9.446574*** −63.65801***
SPD −1.506727 −10.32241*** 0.159422 −10.09496***
SPC 4.552953 −7.028486*** −0.374729 −7.97616***
LSER −8.775255*** −8.591517*** −8.768878*** −47.87539***
UKC −7.816325*** −1.578091 2.746256 −9.61778***
UKD 7.429147*** −12.36282*** 2.571441 −12.31254***
SPR −12.89506*** −6.022076*** −12.13962*** −37.8073***
USC −6.847753*** −5.567572** 4.310638** −7.46537***
USD 3.138569 −5.097646** 7.384682*** −5.006879***
NSR −13.66594*** −13.40744*** −12.64235*** −34.28961***
*, ** and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% level of significance, respectively. Source: Author’s calculation.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 7
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
TABLE 3 | Results of F-bound test.
Test statistic Value Signif. I(0) I(1) Test statistics Value Signif. I(0) I(1)
SPR 10% 2.2 3.09 FTMR 10% 2.2 3.09
F-statistic 63.02410 5% 2.56 3.49 F-statistic 5.165881 5% 2.56 3.49
K 4 2.5% 2.88 3.87 K 4 2.5% 2.88 3.87
1% 3.29 4.37 1% 3.29 4.37
NSR 10% 2.2 3.09 DAXR 10% 2.2 3.09
F-statistic 39.11238 5% 2.56 3.49 F-statistic 38.23325 5% 2.56 3.49
K 4 2.5% 2.88 3.87 K 4 2.5% 2.88 3.87
1% 3.29 4.37 1% 3.29 4.37
IBER 10% 2.2 3.09 LSER 10% 2.2 3.09
F-statistic 5.490181 5% 2.56 3.49 F-statistic 14.03259 5% 2.56 3.49
K 4 2.5% 2.88 3.87 K 4 2.5% 2.88 3.87
1% 3.29 4.37 1% 3.29 4.37
Source: Author’s calculation.
TABLE 4 | Wald test.
Long-run asymmetry Short-run asymmetry Long-run asymmetry Short-run asymmetry
SPR F-stat F-stat FTMR F-stat F-stat
USC 8.093*** USC 6.224** ITC 1.242605 ITC 0.2916
USD 4.779** USD 6.815** ITD 5.864** ITD 0.1767
NSR DAXR
USC 1.574046 USC 4.228** GERC 5.208** GERC 17.24***
USD 2.589403 USD 1.609162 GERD 2.338933 GERD 18.87***
IBER LSER
SPC 1.569179 SPC 2.8616* UKC 0.725822 UKC 0.640751
SPD 2.61007* SPD 6.8974** UKD 0.786146 UKD 0.718125
*, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% level of significance, respectively. Source: Author’s calculation.
results of FTMR designated that ITLD has a long-run asymmetric
relationship with it. The Wald-statistics of GERC enlightened
that it has both long and short-run non-linear impacts on DAXR,
but GERD has a short-term non-linear affiliation with DAXR.
Moreover, UKC denotes a long-run asymmetric liaison with
LSER. Hence, the existence of non-linearity in the study variables
led us to choose the NARDL model for computing long-and
short-run factors.
Modeling NARDL Parameters
The non-linear fallouts of SPR, presented in Table 5, illustrated
that expansion and contraction in USC brings a reduction and
increase in SPR, respectively. It indicates that strict lockdown
substantially decreases the market returns of the S&P 500 and
vice versa. Further, a positive shock in USD caused a significant
rise in SPR. In the short-run, lagged values specified that a
negative shock in USC amplified SPR. Besides, all the lagged
terms described that an uptick effect in USD improved the SPR.
Also, a negative shock in USD and its second lag augmented the
SPR, but the first and third lag represents the reverse impact.
Furthermore, the negative and significant value of ECTt−1 stated
that disequilibrium occurred in SPR today due to COVID-19
will adjust with the speed of 1.3 units on a subsequent day.
The R-squared value indicated that the 91% volatility in SPR is
owing to COVID-19.
The NSR model results exhibited in Table 6, particularized
that both positive and negative shocks in USC escalate the
NSR, while enlargement (reduction) in USD instigate decrease
(increase) in NSR. It specifies that an upsurge in the health crisis
in the US expressively distressed the Nasdaq Composite Index
and vice versa. Nonetheless, in the short-run, a negative shock
in USD and USC demonstrated an imperative decrease in NSR,
whereas an expansion in USC lessens the NSR. The negative
and significant ECTt−1 parameter stated that financial instability
generated due to COVID-19 would be settled with a speed of 1.5
units on the next day. The R-square value signified that 81% of
instability occurring in NSR is the result of COVID-19.
The finding parameters of the IBER model (Table 7) identified
that an assertive shock in SPD has an encouraging effect on IBER.
Besides, adverse shocks remain insignificant. On the other hand,
an escalation (decline) in SPC has a negative (positive) influence
on IBER, implying that strict lockdown considerably caused the
financial crisis in Spain for the long term period. In the short term
period, an intensification in SPC, SPD, and a decline in SPC, SPD
increased the IBER. The negative and significant value of ECTt−1
elucidated that today’s disequilibrium in IBER will adjust on the
next day with a speed of 0.82 units. The coefficient of R-square
stated that 72% of variations in IBER are owing to COVID-19.
Table 8 displayed the fallouts of the FTSE MIB stock market.
The condition of COVID-19 on Italy’s stock markets exposed
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 8
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
TABLE 5 | Asymmetric parameters of SPR.
Variables Short-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
D(USC_NEG) −0.047867*** 0.003539 −13.52394 0
D(USC_NEG(-1)) −0.061323*** 0.003402 −18.02596 0
D(USC_NEG(-2)) −0.108895*** 0.005569 −19.55339 0
D(USC_NEG(-3)) −0.072915*** 0.003619 −20.14618 0
D(USD_POS) 0.713848*** 0.036514 19.55011 0
D(USD_POS(-1)) 0.23431*** 0.014268 16.42276 0
D(USD_POS(-2)) 0.194744*** 0.01369 14.22562 0
D(USD_POS(-3)) 0.334891*** 0.029691 11.27907 0
D(USD_NEG) −0.377433*** 0.055371 −6.816426 0
D(USD_NEG(-1)) 1.65514*** 0.097958 16.89641 0
D(USD_NEG(-2)) −0.074692*** 0.02737 −2.728986 0
D(USD_NEG(-3)) 3.650475*** 0.235321 15.51275 0
ECTt−1 −1.369525*** 0.066813 −20.49782 0
R-Squared 0.912909
Adjusted R-squared 0.892007
Durbin-Watson stat 2.006439
Variables Long-term Coefficients. Std. Error t-stat Prob.
USC_POS −0.004491*** 0.001667 −2.694157 0.0099
USC_NEG −0.054381*** 0.014406 3.774912 0.0005
USD_POS 0.064436** 0.029631 2.174626 0.035
USD_NEG −0.290139 0.338048 −0.858278 0.3953
C 0.181416 0.264851 0.684971 0.4969
*, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% level of significance, respectively. Source: Author’s calculation.
TABLE 6 | Asymmetric parameters of NSR.
Variables Short-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
D(USD_NEG) 0.039324** 0.019503 2.016267 0.0487
D(USC_POS) −0.002147*** 0.000382 −5.622014 0
D(USC_NEG) 0.002319*** 0.00069 3.360414 0.0014
D(USC_NEG(-1)) −0.008198*** 0.001064 −7.703282 0
ECTt−1 −1.501702*** 0.093855 −16.00026 0
R-Squared 0.812596
Adjusted R-squared 0.800102
Durbin-Watson stat 2.130245
Variables Long-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
USD_POS −0.013042*** 0.004465 −2.920922 0.0051
USD_NEG −0.026413 0.030567 −0.864107 0.3913
USC_POS 0.001013*** 0.00034 2.977381 0.0043
USC_NEG 0.004258** 0.001923 2.214416 0.031
C −0.525513* 0.274541 −1.914153 0.0608
*, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% level of significance, respectively. Source: Author’s calculation.
that rise (reduction) in ITLD diminished (amplified) the FTMR,
inferring that heath crisis imperatively contributes to Italy’s
financial instability for the long term period. In addition, growth
in ITLC enlarged the FTMR imperatively. The sort-run condition
in Italy denoted that first, second, and third lag values of FTMR
harmed its own returns. Also, growth in ITLC has a negative
impression on FTMR. Nonetheless, a negative shock in the
second lag value of ITLC indicated an encouraging effect on
FTMR. The consequences of ITLD symbolized that proliferation
in ITLD possess negative sway on FTMER, but the first and
second lag value have definite sway on it. Furthermore, a decline
in ITLD has a direct influence on FTMR. The negative and
significant figure of ECTt−1 itemized that FTMR will readjust
the equilibrium with a speed of 0.95 units each day. The Rsquared parameter denoted that 85% uncertainty generated in
FTMR caused by COVID-19.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 9
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
TABLE 7 | Asymmetric parameters of IBER.
Variables Short-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
D(IBER(-1)) −0.368944*** 0.09522 −3.875 0.0003
D(SPD_POS) 0.018471* 0.009268 1.993 0.0512
D(SPD_NEG) −0.026216** 0.010675 −2.456 0.0172
D(SPC_POS) 0.001511 0.000911 1.6591 0.1028
D(SPC_NEG) −0.001832* 0.000966 −1.897 0.0631
D(SPC_NEG(-1)) 0.00301*** 0.000996 3.0316 0.0037
D(SPC_NEG(-2)) 0.006948*** 0.00129 5.3867 0
ECTt−1 −0.824331*** 0.137511 −5.995 0
R-Squared 0.726141
Adjusted R-squared 0.694191
Durbin-Watson stat 2.154368
Variables Long-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
SPD_POS 0.053991*** 0.01765 3.0589 0.0034
SPD_NEG 0.023488 0.018017 1.3037 0.1978
SPC_POS −0.006341*** 0.001968 −3.222 0.0021
SPC_NEG −0.005173** 0.001945 −2.659 0.0102
C −0.636028 0.428132 −1.486 0.1431
*, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% level of significance, respectively. Source: Author’s calculation.
TABLE 8 | Asymmetric parameters of FTMR.
Variables Short-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
D(FTMR(-1)) −0.27947** 0.138377 −2.019624 0.0493
D(FTMR(-2)) −0.154875 0.136743 −1.132605 0.2632
D(FTMR(-3)) −0.295127** 0.113398 −2.602569 0.0124
D(ITLC_POS) −0.008711*** 0.001397 −6.235569 0
D(ITLC_POS(-1)) −0.015154*** 0.003264 −4.642728 0
D(ITLC_POS(-2)) −0.0047 0.002589 −1.573306 0.1225
D(ITLC_NEG) −0.001115 0.001937 −0.575378 0.5678
D(ITLC_NEG(-1)) 0.006885*** 0.00198 3.477965 0.0011
D(ITLC_NEG(-2)) −0.003758** 0.001782 −2.109409 0.0404
D(ITLD_POS) −0.06983*** 0.014714 −4.745672 0
D(ITLD_POS(-1)) 0.023801* 0.011962 1.989722 0.0526
D(ITLD_POS(-2)) 0.029575*** 0.010511 2.813763 0.0072
D(ITLD_NEG) 0.002565 0.012862 0.199404 0.8428
D(ITLD_NEG(-1)) 0.038093** 0.015194 2.507186 0.0158
D(ITLD_NEG(-2)) 0.04502*** 0.013664 3.294772 0.0019
ECTt−1 −0.959373*** 0.163657 −5.862111 0
R-Squared 0.851016
Adjusted R-squared 0.807197
Durbin-Watson stat 1.763297
Variables Long-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
ITLC_POS 0.013317** 0.005649 2.357295 0.0227
ITLC_NEG 0.001321 0.002682 0.492464 0.6247
ITLD_POS −0.109433** 0.053273 −2.054209 0.0457
ITLD_NEG −0.048345** 0.020559 −2.351573 0.023
C −0.500777 0.455916 −1.098396 0.2777
*, **, and *** denote 10%, 5% and 1% level of significance, respectively. Source: Author’s calculation.
The parameters of DAX 30 (Table 9) directed, in the
long run, an upsurge (diminution) in GERD compacted
(enlarge) the DAXR. Moreover, the decline in GERC also
improves DAXR. These findings revealed that both lockdown
and health crises are harmful to the stock markets of
Germany. The short-term findings described that second,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 10
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
TABLE 9 | Asymmetric parameters of DAXR.
Variables Short-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
D(GERC_POS) 0.015476*** 0.001209 12.80122 0
D(GERC_POS(-1)) 0.012439*** 0.001923 6.467043 0
D(GERC_POS(-2)) −0.088025*** 0.005402 −16.29596 0
D(GERC_POS(-3)) −0.057992*** 0.003854 −15.04828 0
D(GERC_POS(-4)) −0.097*** 0.00647 −14.99249 0
D(GERC_NEG) 0.05202*** 0.004721 11.11903 0
D(GERC_NEG(-1)) −0.067796*** 0.004325 −15.67443 0
D(GERC_NEG(-2)) 0.044564*** 0.003649 12.21376 0
D(GERC_NEG(-3)) 0.01327*** 0.004158 3.191441 0.0041
D(GERC_NEG(-4)) 0.183056*** 0.01145 15.98705 0
D(GERD_POS) −5.101477*** 0.313432 −16.27619 0
D(GERD_POS(-1)) 5.265597*** 0.35462 14.84858 0
D(GERD_POS(-2)) −0.054459 0.100825 −0.540134 0.5943
D(GERD_POS(-3)) 6.261756*** 0.386781 16.18939 0
D(GERD_NEG) −3.913296*** 0.288936 −13.54383 0
D(GERD_NEG(-1)) 30.64757*** 1.850055 16.56576 0
D(GERD_NEG(-2)) 23.76795*** 1.466544 16.20677 0
D(GERD_NEG(-3)) 19.4969*** 1.21192 16.08761 0
ECTt−1 −0.497359*** 0.029762 −16.71134 0
R-Squared 0.945788
Adjusted R-squared 0.910937
Durbin-Watson stat 1.667758
Variables Long-term Coefficients. Std. Error t-stat Prob.
GERC_POS 0.016748 0.035958 0.465776 0.6458
GERC_NEG −0.255912** 0.1228 −2.083972 0.0485
GERD_POS −19.28734*** 7.569148 −2.548151 0.018
GERD_NEG −65.49979** 25.3728 −2.581496 0.0167
C −2.440744** 0.93232 −2.617925 0.0154
*, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% level of significance, respectively. Source: Author’s calculation.
TABLE 10 | Asymmetric parameters of LSER.
Variables Short-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
D(UKC_POS) −0.00127 0.001661 −0.764723 0.4475
D(UKC_POS(-1)) 0.022345*** 0.003248 6.878603 0
D(UKC_NEG) 0.009267*** 0.002137 4.337228 0.0001
D(UKD_POS) −0.03503*** 0.00746 −4.695883 0
D(UKD_POS(-1)) −0.090212*** 0.014812 −6.090388 0
ECTt−1 −1.100754*** 0.115104 −9.563147 0
R-Squared 0.651816
Adjusted R-squared 0.624182
Durbin-Watson stat 1.867108
Variables Long-term coefficients Std. Error t-stat Prob.
UKC_POS −0.003609* 0.00191 −1.889866 0.0638
UKC_NEG −0.003213 0.002112 −1.521044 0.1337
UKD_POS 0.075038** 0.02864 2.620078 0.0112
UKD_NEG 0.086022** 0.035056 2.453823 0.0172
C −0.319529 0.353596 −0.903654 0.3699
*, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% level of significance, respectively. Source: Author’s calculation.
third, and fourth lag of positive shocks in GERC has a
lessening impact on DAXR. However, a negative shock in
GERC and other lag values except the first lag indicated
an indirect association with DAXR. Additionally, positive
shocks in GERD quantified mixed impact on DAXR,
while a short term decline in GERD has negative, but first
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 11
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
lag, second lag, and third lag values point out positive
linkage with DAXR. These effects are because of instability
generated due to COVID-19. The R-squared coefficient
diagnosed that the 94.5% instability in DAXR is because
of COVID-19.
Table 10 represents the results of the London Stock
exchange. The concluding coefficients of the UK explored that
augmentation in UKD improved the LSER, while diminution
in UKD reduces the LSER in the long term period, although
the growth of UKC brought a significant decrease in LSER.
The short term period outlined that positive shocks in UKC
reduced the LSER, but the first lag value of positive shock
in UKD showed an alternate impression. Additionally, an
upturn in UKD possesses a diminishing impact on LSER.
These outcomes designated that lockdown and health crises
generated due to COVID-19 negatively impact the financial
markets of the UK for the short term period. The value of
ECTt-1 showed that fluxes occurred today in LSER will get
equilibrium with the speed of 1.1 units on the next day.
The R-square value reported a 65% variation in LSER due
to COVID-19. Figure 3 depicts the adjustment of asymmetric
effect in the existing long-run equilibrium, once moved to a
new long-run equilibrium as a result of positive and adverse
shocks. The asymmetric plots denote the alliance of dynamic
multipliers owing to positive and adverse shocks in S&P 500,
DAX 30, FTSE MIB, Nasdaq Composite index, IBEX 35, and LSE
markets. The outcomes revealed that these markets tremendously
respond to the positive and negative shocks befallen due
to COVID-19.
Diagnostic Parameters Evaluation
The examination employed the Breusch and Pagan (2006) test
to diagnose the Serial Correlation and Heteroskedasticity in
each model’s residuals, Ramsey RESET technique, to ascertain
functional misspecification, CUSUM, and CUSUMSQ (Ploberger
and Kramer, 2006) test to define the reliability of parameters.
The conclusions of these tests given in Table 11, nominated
that there was no serial correlation and Heteroskedasticity in
the residuals of each model. Besides, the plots of CUSUM and
CUSUMSQ presented in Figure 4 remain within the 5% critical
boundaries, inferring that coefficients of the NARDL model
are stable.
CONCLUSION
COVID-19 has imperatively shaken the economic indicators,
primarily the financial markets of the globe. The number of
patients and deaths as a result of COVID-19 are increasing
day by day, and economic conditions have become entirely
uncertain. Moreover, the financial markets of the world fronted
a sudden crash in their market values. This investigation
utilized the Non-linear Autoregressive Distributed Lag (NARDL)
approach to estimate the non-linear impact of economic crisis
and health crisis generated as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic on the behavior of financial markets of the most
infected territories of Europe and the US. The analysis stated
FIGURE 3 | The dynamic multiplier plots.
that the returns of the S&P 500 index are greatly affected by
the economic crisis generated because of COVID-19 in the
US. However, an accession in the health crisis, because of
COVID-19, significantly decreased the Nasdaq Composite Index
returns. These results confirmed that economic instability and
the health management system have an imperative control over
the financial markets’ behavior. The verdicts elaborated that the
economic crisis produced as a result of lockdown circumstances
in Spain has more impact on IBEX 35 as compared to the
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 12
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
TABLE 11 | Diagnostic test results.
Heteroskedasticity Value Serial correlation Value Heteroskedasticity Value Serial correlation Value
SR FTMR
F-statistic 1.321 F-statistic 0.5464 F-statistic 1.527 F-statistic 2.3644
Ramsey RESET F-statistic 2.3623 Ramsey RESET F-statistic 1.7672
NSR DAXR
Heteroskedasticity Serial Correlation Heteroskedasticity Serial Correlation
F-statistic 0.210 F-statistic 0.6362 F-statistic 0.264 F-statistic 0.8397
Ramsey RESET F-statistic 0.1927 Ramsey RESET F-statistic 0.2731
IBER LSER
Heteroskedasticity Serial Correlation Heteroskedasticity Serial correlation
F-statistic 0.929 F-statistic 1.4019 F-statistic 0.479 F-statistic 1.9939
Ramsey RESET F-statistic 0.4698 Ramsey RESET F-statistic 1.3502
*, **, and *** denote 10, 5, and 1% level of significance, respectively. Source: Author’s calculation.
FIGURE 4 | The CUSUM and CUSUMSQ graph.
health crisis that resulted in Spain. In the long-run, Italy’s
stock markets are more affected by the health crisis than the
economic crisis, while, in the short-run, economic uncertainty
also lowered the stock returns of FTSE MIB. Nevertheless, the
health crisis in Germany pointing to a significant upsurge in
the economic crisis intimated an unimportant impression on the
FTSE 100 index. The stock markets of the UK recorded that,
in the short-run, an upsurge in the health crisis imperatively
damages the stock returns of the LSE index, but in the
long run, this influence was left to reverse. Therefore, this
research authenticated that the health crisis begun with COVID19 has devised another global financial crisis, and almost
every nation is fighting with these crises today. Moreover,
the study disclosed that economic uncertainty generated by
COVID-19 is highest in the German stock markets, while
the S&P 500 index is on the second-ranking, and Italian
stock markets are on the third-ranking. The study concluded
that the health crisis and economic crisis ominously affected
the stock markets of the globe. Consequently, a significant
amount should be allocated in the budget to explore and
prevent these pandemics in the future. Further, a complete
lockdown strategy does not prove to be an excellent remedy
as it harms the financial markets, so other strategies should be
developed, i.e., smart/partial lockdown. These suggestions are
essential for policymakers, Government officials, researchers, and
the general public.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1924fpsyg-11-01924 September 2, 2020 Time: 17:34 # 13
Shehzad et al. Financial Markets’ Behavior and COVID-19
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study. This data
can be found here: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
KS: conceptualization, analysis, and methodology. LX:
supervision. MI: introduction. MA: results and discussion, and
conclusion. KR: revising work, proofreading, and visualization.
All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.




NEW PAPER



The Psychology of the COVID-19 Pandemic:
A Group-Level Perspective
Cheri L. Marmarosh
The George Washington University
Donelson R. Forsyth
University of Richmond
Bernhard Strauss
University Hospital, Jena, Germany
Gary M. Burlingame
Brigham Young University
Objective: The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) threatened not only people’s physical
health but also every aspect of their psychological well-being: from their struggle to
avoid contracting the disease, to their coping with the disruption of the normal course
of their lives, to the trauma they endured when the virus took the lives of those they
loved. The objective of this article is to consider the group-level processes that sustain
people’s physical and psychological well-being during COVID-19. Method: Applying
group dynamic and group therapy theory and research, we explore why COVID-19
spread so rapidly. We also explore how people cope with prolonged social isolation,
distress, and social inequities, as well as how people deal with the psychological trauma
of the disease, which includes heightened levels of depression, anxiety, substance
abuse, and complicated bereavement. Results: Researchers and theorists suggest that
human beings are fundamentally social, and the need to gather with others is extremely
important, especially during times of distress. The need to belong as well as the
importance of reducing loneliness during uncertain times often encourages people to
connect, despite recommendations to remain socially distant. Conclusions: Group
treatment options developed by group psychotherapists are effective at reducing depression, anxiety, complicated grief, and stress. We conclude by examining the growing impact of online groups and the many ways that these groups help people improve
their psychological well-being during the COVID-19 crisis.
Highlights and Implications
• Group dynamic theorists and researchers provide important contributions to the
understanding of the prevention of COVID-19. Group dynamics explain why
some people perceive less of a threat and why some people refuse to wear face
masks or social distance.
• Group psychotherapy researchers and practitioners describe the importance of
group leadership, group cohesion, and the effects of loneliness and social
isolation on people coping with COVID-19.
X Cheri L. Marmarosh, Department of Psychology,
The George Washington University; X Donelson R.
Forsyth, Jepson School of Leadership Studies, University of Richmond; Bernhard Strauss, Institute of Psychosocial Medicine, Psychotherapy and Psycho oncology,
University Hospital, Jena, Germany; X Gary M. Burlingame, Department of Psychology, Brigham Young
University.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Cheri L. Marmarosh, Department of Psychology, The
George Washington University, 1922 F Street, Washington, DC 20008. E-mail: cmarmarosh@gmail.com
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Group Dynamics:
Theory, Research, and Practice
© 2020 American Psychological Association 2020, Vol. 24, No. 3, 122–138
ISSN: 1089-2699 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/gdn0000142
122• Given the mental and physical health challenges we face with COVID-19, online
group and group therapy interventions are becoming more prevalent. The
importance of future studies examining the effectiveness of online groups (both
support and therapy) are necessary. We also need studies that examine what
individual difference variables influence the effectiveness of online group interventions, such as age, race, class, ethnicity, culture, attachment style, and level
of isolation.
• One of the main implications of this article is that it is critical to examine the
group-level factors that influence how we navigate a pandemic. Groups influence how we prevent the transmission of COVID-19, how we sustain ourselves
during periods of social isolation, and how we address the effects of complicated
bereavement, trauma, illness, social inequities, unemployment, anxiety, and
depression.
Keywords: group therapy, COVID-19, pandemic, group dynamics
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the severe respiratory
syndrome coronavirus COVID-19 a pandemic.
A devastating disease, the virus caused respiratory collapse, inflammation, and organ failure,
resulting in the death of over half a million
people in the first 6 months of the pandemic.
With no known cure or vaccine available, the
threat seemed dire but also unavoidable. People’s lives were substantially disrupted as everyday interactions were replaced by prolonged
periods of isolation and loneliness. Most social
activities, such as school and work, were suspended, as were many sources of general life
satisfaction and happiness, such as leisure and
recreational activities. As the disease intensified, researchers documented elevated levels of
depression and anxiety, increases in intrusive
thoughts and sleep disturbances, substantial and
negative changes in feelings and emotional responsiveness, and substance abuse (e.g., Wang
et al., 2020). It is difficult to identify any aspect
of people’s psychological experiences that was
not significantly influenced by the disease.
Understanding and responding effectively to
the psychological impact of the pandemic requires recognizing and intervening to undo the
chaos it wrought on individuals’ adjustment, but
here we focus on the group-level processes pertaining to the prevention, maintenance, and restoration (after loss) of psychological well-being
before, during, and after the pandemic. The
pandemic attacked not just individuals but also
their relationships and the groups that sustain
those relationships, including their families,
work groups, and friendship circles. To cope,
social isolation was mandated, but that mandate
separated people from the groups that sustain
them. As sheltering in place wore on, the isolation strained the resources of people’s remaining alliances, including their families and closest friendships. The illness was also, in many
cases, a fatal one and so permanently changed
the nature and structure of many people’s
groups and relationships. Specifically, we draw
on the psychology of groups and their dynamics
to (a) explain how people reacted to the threat of
the virus (e.g., coping with health threats, increasing compliance with health mandates); (b)
suggest ways to counter the negative psychological side effects people may experience during the pandemic (e.g., dealing with social isolation, reducing stress in quarantined groups);
and (c) help individuals deal with the psychological consequences of the pandemic experience, including the loss of friends and loved
ones to the disease (e.g., coping with grief).
This focus on group-level processes does not
assume individual-level processes need not be
considered but instead only seeks to redress the
tendency to stress individual approaches rather
than interpersonal ones. All too often, analyses
focus on individual prevention strategies such
as wearing a mask, individual factors that influence health risks such as age, and individual
interventions to cope with distress such as oneon-one counseling. The current analysis, in contrast, serves as a reminder that people are substantially influenced by group interactions and
of how extremely important groups can be when
GROUP AND COVID-19 123
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.preventing and treating people who are suffering during COVID-19. In 2018, the American
Psychological Association’s Commission for
the Recognition of Specialties and Proficiencies
in Professional Psychology recognized group
therapy as a specialty. This recognition emphasized the importance of group dynamics and the
benefits of group interventions that are critical
to mental health and relevant to coping with
COVID-19. Although there may not be research
that has studied the group factors directly related to prevention or intervention and COVID19, we can apply the knowledge we have from
years of group theory and research to this pandemic. Group theory, research, and practice has
important implications for how we try to control
the spread of COVID-19, facilitate coping with
the virus, and intervene when the public struggles with job loss, mental illness, health disparities, and complicated grief.
Prevention: Minimizing the Risk of
Contracting COVID-19
COVID-19, a highly communicable disease,
has spread worldwide. Authorities, recognizing
the magnitude of the threat, warned citizens of
the infection and proposed a series of nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to limit contagion (e.g., stock sufficient food and water, secure medical supplies, and avoid travel to
destinations where the virus was emerging).
These NPIs were crucially important for controlling the spread of the disease, and the number of cases was lower in places where people
prepared diligently (e.g., Brauner et al., 2020).
However, many people failed to accurately assess the magnitude of the threat and heed repeated reminders to minimize that threat. Although studies of how people prepare for
impending crises have identified a number of
psychological processes that can work to interfere with proactive responses, including unrealistic optimism, diminished self-efficacy, and
avoidance of information pertaining to the
threat (Shepperd, Klein, Waters, & Weinstein,
2013; Stewart, 2015; Sweeny, Melnyk, Miller,
& Shepperd, 2010), these psychological processes were amplified by group-level processes
that caused individuals to misjudge the magnitude of the threat and join together with others
when they should have practiced social distancing.
Reassurance or Accuracy
People encountering a threat usually respond
to minimize that threat, particularly if they believe the threat to be highly probable and the
outcome to be severely negative and if the steps
to take to reduce the threat are considered efficacious (e.g., Floyd, Prentice-Dunn, & Rogers,
2000). Their estimates of likelihood, severity,
and response efficacy are determined by the
objective, factual claims of authorities—such as
warnings from the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC)—but also by the actions
and reactions of those around them. For example, even though the CDC may warn that
COVID-19 poses a great risk to health, individuals may reject that information if it is inconsistent with the estimates of those they associate
with on a regular basis (e.g., family members,
coworkers, social network connections). Studies of social comparison processes suggest individuals strive for accuracy but that they also
show a preference for reassuring, comforting
information. In the case of COVID-19, associating with people who suggested that the virus
was only as threatening as the flu or even a hoax
resulted in an incautious response to the virus
(e.g., Erceg, Ružojcˇic´, & Galic, 2020).
Individuals’ miscalibrated estimates of threat
potential could have been adjusted as they discussed their estimates with other people, but
error checking is often overlooked as groups
share information. Groups can manifest rationality as they pool information to reach the best
decision possible (e.g., Larson, 2010), but too
often people overshare ideas that are common
within the group. If many individuals in the
group are aware of some fact, datum, or case,
the group will spend an inordinate amount of
time discussing those inputs and fail to consider
ideas and information held by only a few individuals in the group. In consequence, groups too
often fail to make the best choice—one that is
fully informed by all the available information.
In the case of COVID-19, even if some members of the group are aware of data that accurately signal the magnitude of the threat, their
voices will not be heard as the group discusses
the crisis (Stasser & Abele, 2020).
Unfortunately, people do not recognize the
extent to which their opinions, beliefs, and behaviors are influenced by those around them
(Cialdini, 2005). They often assume that they
124 MARMAROSH, FORSYTH, STRAUSS, AND BURLINGAME
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.have objectively reviewed the facts and have
based their response on this rational analysis,
when in actuality, their responses are determined by social comparison biases, overreliance on shared information, and conformity to
group norms. For example, the data that they
themselves gather locally—from those they interact with—tend to influence people even more
than they realize. As Zell and Alicke (2010)
discovered in their studies of the local dominance effect, people’s judgments are more influenced by their close social contacts rather
than the more diffuse data based on the responses of thousands of people. Yet when asked
to describe their metacognitive processing of
the information, people were certain that they
were relying on the data from the highly representative sample rather than the anecdotal case
data provided to them by their associates.
Socializing or Quarantining
Because there was no known cure for the
disease, nor a vaccine that would prevent infection, public health authorities relied on NPIs to
limit the spread of the disease within the population. In particular, the CDC advised individuals to maintain social distance (www.cdc.gov/
coronavirus/), and state officials included this
requirement in the health mandates.
NPIs were medically necessary, but limiting
individuals’ contact with other people blocked
them from the primary means of coping with the
stress of traumatic events: their groups. Those
who study mental health—clinical, counseling,
community, and health psychologists, social
workers, and psychiatrists—have long recognized the relationship between groups and
members’ psychological well-being. Theory
and research suggest that people need to be
connected to other people and that, if these
connections are severed, they experience significant psychological distress. As Baumeister and
Leary (1995) suggested, humans have a powerful need to belong: “a pervasive drive to form
and maintain at least a minimum quantity of
lasting, positive, and impactful interpersonal relationships” (p. 497). They likened the need to
belong to other basic needs, such as hunger or
thirst. Individuals therefore, under most circumstances, resist isolation and seclusion; they
choose to affiliate with others rather than be
alone.
This need to belong is strongest when people
face a stressful, uncertain future. In times of
trouble, such as illness, catastrophe, natural disaster, or financial upheaval, they seek out comfort and support by joining with other people
(Rofé, 1984). Decades of research on coping
confirms the stress-affiliation effect: People
seek out others as a coping mechanism to acquire reassuring information germane to the
threat, secure emotional support, and acquire
tangible aid (Aspinwall & Taylor, 1997; Cohen
& Wills, 1985; Hill, 1987). This reaction is, in
most cases, an adaptive one, for affiliating with
others reduces morbidity and mortality, modulates key neural and biological responses to
stress, and reduces the negative effects of major
stressful life events (see Taylor, 2011 for a
review). However, in the case of a threat of a
contagious disease, the need to belong compels
individuals to seek out association with others
even though that association is unhealthy.
In consequence, despite warnings to avoid
groups, many people continued to join them,
even though that risky socializing provided the
disease the opportunity to spread from the infected to the uninfected. When surveyed after
the CDC released its guidelines of social distancing (March 17–20, 2020), many people reported actions that were inconsistent with the
mandate: They were continuing to join with
others in face-to-face social groups, sit side by
side in public settings, and take part in large
social gatherings without face coverings (R.
Forsyth, 2020). These individuals, in general,
were not the people in the sample who felt they
were unlikely to contract the illness or those
who believed they would survive the illness. In
fact, recognition that the virus was a significant
health threat and that they would likely contract
it were associated with more, rather than less,
risky socializing. Disregarding the mandate to
socially distance was also associated with dispositional differences in respondents’ preference to join with others when stressed (Hill,
1987). Those who engaged in risky socializing
were also people who were more likely to agree
with statements such as “If I feel unhappy or
kind of depressed (stressed), I usually try to be
around other people to make me feel better” and
“One of my greatest sources of comfort when
things get rough is being with other people”
(Hill, 1987, p. 1011).
GROUP AND COVID-19 125
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.Compliance or Resistance
As the number of COVID-19 cases increased,
the CDC urged individuals to continue taking
precautions to minimize the spread of the virus,
including maintaining social distance, avoiding
groups, and wearing face coverings. However,
many people resisted this mandate. Churches
continued to hold services, people congregated
in parks, beaches, and clubs, and travel resumed. The CDC’s requirement to wear facecovering became, over time, a contentious, politically charged issue, and the media reported
multiple incidents of confrontations between
the masked and unmasked (McKelvey, 2020).
In some cases, large groups of people gathered
publicly to protest the mandates, displaying a
marked consistency in their actions and attitudes.
No one factor distinguishes those who adopted the mandated NPIs and those who resisted. Some who refused to comply did not
think the disease was a significant threat to
them, personally (e.g., Harper, Satchell, Fido, &
Latzman, 2020). Individuals with certain
traits—such as elevated levels of narcissism and
psychopathy—complied less than people
whose personalities did not include these dark
triad characteristics (Nowa et al., 2020). However, group-level processes likely also generated this marked variance in response to the
CDC’s NPIs. The pandemic restricted people’s
contact with other people, and so reduced the
density and heterogeneity of their social networks. This isolation, combined with the tendency to maximize cohesion during periods of
stress, likely resulted in both polarization and an
increased identification with the group and its
norms. Those norms, in some cases, stressed
compliance: that taking steps to minimize the
spread of the virus was the socially approved
course of action, and that not complying would
be considered unusual and inappropriate. But in
some social groups, noncompliance became the
norm. These groups maintained that government authorities had no right to curtail people’s
freedom to assemble, travel, and work, and so
wearing a mask in public or quarantining was
considered socially indefensible by the members of these groups. In consequence, noncompliance came to be associated with group identity. As social identity theory suggests, when
people categorize themselves as members of a
particular group they subsequently strive to act,
think, and feel in ways that they believe are
prototypical for a member of that group (Hogg,
Hains, & Mason, 1998). Sustained, psychologically, but this collectively shared social identity, those who resisted compliance acted in
ways that spread rather than controlled a deadly
disease (D. Forsyth, 2020).
Protection: Coping During the
COVID-19 Crisis
How do we endure when forced to cope with
the long-term effects of a pandemic like COVID19? We have addressed the challenges to prevent
the spread of the disease, but there are other struggles caused by COVID-19. There is the stress of
isolation on groups of people, such as families
who are sequestered from the outside world.
There is also ongoing risk of getting sick, job loss
and financial insecurity, and the death of loved
ones. Not to mention the stress of racial and
economic inequities and an overwhelmed
health care system. Psychologists have studied the impact of each of these on well-being,
and they provide important guidance as we
navigate the ways social groups and group
therapy can help people cope.
Experiences in Isolated Groups: The Value
of Cohesion
During COVID-19, many families were isolated from the outside world. How did people
cope when their social networks shrink from
many to very few? Did they seize this time of
enforced togetherness to strengthen their attachments to one another—to share, support, and
appreciate each other? Or did boredom, tension,
and conflict grow with each passing day?
Studies of groups that have spent long periods of time in isolation, such as teams stationed
in Antarctica and explorers living for months on
end in a confined space, suggest that some
groups will prosper, but others will falter under
the strain. During the International Geophysical
Year (1957–1958), for example, several countries sent small groups of military and civilian
personnel to outposts in Antarctica. These
groups were responsible for collecting data
about that largely unknown continent, but the
violent weather forced the staff to remain indoors most of the time. As months went by with
126 MARMAROSH, FORSYTH, STRAUSS, AND BURLINGAME
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.little change in their situation, morale declined
and group members’ initial friendliness, good
humor, and sensitivity were replaced with lethargy, low morale, grouchiness, and boredom.
Other groups, however, manage to prosper
when cut off from the outside world. Some of
the isolated groups studied by researchers at the
Naval Medical Research Institute in Bethesda,
Maryland, for example, responded quite positively when sequestered. These researchers confined pairs of volunteers to a 12-by-12-foot
room with no means of interacting with anyone
outside of that space—no computer, no Internet,
no media. Some of these groups imploded—
they insisted they be released from the study
after only a few days. Others, however, thrived.
Over the course of the isolation, their reliance
on one another strengthened, as did their satisfaction with their circumstances. They shared
concerns and worries about how they were dealing with the isolation and made adjustments
whenever conflicts and tensions arose. They set
up schedules of activities, even agreeing on a
plan of action for meals, exercise, and recreation. Cooperation, then, was critical. As one
person who spent considerable time in an isolated group in an underwater habitat, SEALAB,
explained, “If we hadn’t had a real compatible
group there might have been a lot of hard feelings. Everybody was cooperative. They all
worked and helped each other as much as possible. I think it was a real good group” (Radloff
& Helmreich, 1968, p. 82). The successful
groups also avoided one of the symptoms of
maladaptive responding displayed by the less
successful groups: withdrawal. The members of
groups that did not cope well with isolation,
over time, tended to stop interacting with each
other—they cocooned instead of communicating, collaborating, cooperating, and caring for
one another (Radloff & Helmreich, 1968).
What we can learn from this study of groups
in isolation is that group cohesion is one of the
factors that helps groups survive during times of
distress. It is the glue that keeps people together
when things are challenging in the group, such
as conflict within the group. During this pandemic, many people have been in groups such
as health care workers helping patients with
COVID-19, employees engaging in online
zoom meetings, or families socially isolating
together. It is important for us to understand
how to facilitate cohesion within these groups
and to tolerate conflict when it surfaces. Group
researchers and therapists have long recognized
the importance of group cohesion and studied
how it facilitates safety and the ability to tolerate tensions in the group (Yalom & Leszcz,
2005).
The bonds between the members of cohesive
groups are strong and not easily broken, and
these bonds sustain members’ sense of wellbeing. Several studies have indicated that cohesion positively correlates with an elevation in
members’ self-esteem, reduced symptoms, and
higher rates of goal attainment (Braaten, 1989;
Budman et al., 1989; Tschuschke & Dies,
1994). In families, cohesion is negatively related to loneliness, and family cohesion also can
decrease loneliness for family members (Fujimori, Hayashi, Fujiwara, & Matsusaka, 2017).
A meta-analysis examining the relationship between cohesion and group therapy treatment
outcome in 40 studies indicated that cohesion
significantly related to outcome in both inpatient and outpatient settings (Burlingame, McClendon, & Yang, 2018).
How do we foster cohesion in groups? This is
an important question, and group dynamic researchers and group therapists have focused on
the impact of empathy in the group. Johnson,
Burlingame, Olsen, Davies, and Gleave (2005)
found that empathy by leaders and/or members
related to perceived positive relationships
within the group. Researchers also have shown
that leaders who promote interpersonal interaction and prioritize the cultivation of cohesion
also facilitate a greater bond between members
(Burlingame et al., 2018).
One of the most inhibiting leadership factors
is the leader’s inability to tolerate emotional
reactions (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2016). Failure
to be able to express or accept caring, to address
conflict, or to explore members’ avoidant behaviors (e.g., missed sessions/tardy behavior)
negatively influences the development of cohesion within a group (Yalom & Leszcz, 2005).
Social psychologists found that the more a
leader engaged in avoidant behaviors, such as
dismissing vulnerability/avoiding members’
needs, the less group members rated group cohesion (Davidovitz, Mikulincer, Shaver, Izsak,
& Popper, 2007). Similarly, Smokowski, Rose,
Todar, and Reardon (1999) found that dropout
from the group increased when group members
GROUP AND COVID-19 127
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.experienced group leaders as not adequately
supporting or protecting them.
During COVID-19, people are often interacting in groups. Many are cloistered with family
for long periods of time in isolation, medical
teams are working together in high-stress situations, and government groups are negotiating
supplies to protect health care workers. It is
helpful to recognize how the research on cohesion can influence these groups. To increase
cohesion within these groups, one needs to have
leaders who invite open conversations among
members that encourage differences and disagreements (Burlingame, Fuhriman, & Johnson,
2002; Yalom & Leszcz, 2005). In medical
teams, cohesion is critical. Brindley, Mosier,
and Hicks (2020) studied how clear tasks and
preparation enhanced cohesion, which is necessary when establishing an airway for patients
sick with COVID-19. In all groups, there needs
to be an awareness of the impact of race, ethnicity, and culture (DeLlucia-Waack, 2011).
Leaders who are not able to help the group
examine and resolve conflicts around diversity
will have members experience discrimination
and prejudice in the group that is likely to erode
group cohesion.
Loneliness and the Benefit of Groups
When the public is required to social distance
to protect others and oneself from exposure to a
virus, there is a likelihood that some people will
experience more isolation and loneliness, while
others can social distance and remain socially
connected. We know that being socially connected positively influences psychological and
emotional well-being, physical health (Uchino,
2006), and life expectancy (Holt-Lunstad,
Smith, Baker, Harris, & Stephenson, 2015;
Shor, Roelfs, & Yogev, 2013). Unfortunately,
many people may not be as fortunate and will
experience disconnection and isolation that
causes depression, anxiety, and stress (Bai et al.,
2004; Mihashi et al., 2009). Brooks et al. (2020)
reviewed the effects of quarantine and found
that there were long-lasting effects of being
quarantined that exist years later, especially for
health care workers, and these effects included
avoiding people who could be sick and avoiding
work.
Researchers have shown that loneliness can
have long-term deleterious effects, and it is a
subjective experience. People can feel alone
even when with their families or in groups.
Holt-Lunstad et al. (2015) found, even after
accounting for multiple factors, that increased
likelihood of death was 26% for reported loneliness, 29% for social isolation, and 32% for
living alone. The results indicated no difference
between objective and subjective measures of
social isolation when predicting mortality. It
seems as though any kind of loneliness can be a
health risk. This is especially important during
COVID-19 when people are distancing and
feeling more isolated.
We know that joining groups is one way
individuals can cope with loneliness and isolation (Forsyth, 2018). When people struggle with
these feelings, they often seek out support
groups to feel less alone (Forsyth & Elliott,
1999). In addition to support groups, people
seek out group psychotherapy to help them feel
less alone and to address important issues.
Yalom and Leszcz (2005) describe how being
with others in the group who experience similar
feelings is one of the most curative aspects of
groups.
One subset of the population that has been hit
particularly hard is the elderly. The elderly are
required to socially isolate more to prevent serious illness and are more likely to feel more
isolated. Researchers have applied a psychosocial group intervention for lonely older people,
and it has been effective at increasing social
activation, new friendships, and remaining in
the group, as well as improved well-being and
subjective health and decreasing need for health
services (Supiano & Luptak, 2014).
Unemployment, Financial Loss,
and Group Support
One of the major stressors for individuals
during a pandemic is job loss, the requirement
to stay home, and the rise in unemployment.
According to Brooks et al. (2020), financial loss
during quarantine related to psychological disorders, anger, and anxiety. They also found that
delays in receiving government funding and
having a lower income in general before the
quarantine had a negative impact.
Groups provide support for those during
times of layoff, and spending time with fellow
coworkers can facilitate coping (Cooper, 1981).
Social support also has been shown to moderate
128 MARMAROSH, FORSYTH, STRAUSS, AND BURLINGAME
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.the effects of involuntary job loss (Caravan,
Gallo, & Marshall, 2020), but this was related to
race, education, and prior social support before
the loss of employment. In essence, White, educated individuals with prior social support
benefited the most from social support after
involuntary job loss to reduce depression. The
findings expose the different experience of job
loss during a pandemic and the importance of
examining how job loss and unemployment due
to COVID-19 affect people differently depending on economic status and race.
Social Inequality and Groups
to Promote Change
As we started to see who was impacted most
by COVID-19, we learned that not everyone
was affected the same way. Minorities, especially Black minorities, had the highest rate of
mortality in major cities that were hit hard by
the virus. According to Yancy (2020), 50–70%
of COVID deaths were Black individuals even
when they represented 14–30% of the total population of a city. A similar pattern is found
globally with predominantly Black countries
having the greatest infection and death rate
compared to predominantly White countries. Issues of racism, discrimination, and health care
inequities add incredible stress to individuals
and relate to mental (Carter & Forsyth, 2010;
Murali & Oyebode, 2004; Schwartz, 2017) and
physical health (Sacker, Head, Gimeno, & Bartley, 2009). They also relate to coping with the
additional trauma of COVID-19.
Although discrimination by groups has a negative impact on health (Pascoe & Smart Richman, 2009), groups also can provide a resource
for minorities and marginalized populations.
Belonging to groups with others who have similar experiences increases a sense of belonging
and provides support. Groups that invite people
of different backgrounds and identities also promote social justice and change. Frantell, Miles,
and Ruwe (2019) reviewed the importance of
intergroup dialogues and that bringing people
with different identities together fosters intergroup relationships, develops self-awareness,
and promotes social justice. These types of
group conversations are critical during COVID19, when we are also facing a time when we are
seeing higher mortality of minorities, health
care inequalities, and increased racism.
Complicated Bereavement and Group
Intervention
During COVID-19, many people lost loved
ones suddenly from the virus and were not able
to comfort their dying family members or engage in funerals with family and friends. The
lack of support, religious rituals, and physical
proximity to family has led some to experience
complicated bereavement (Burke & Neimeyer,
2013). Complicated bereavement occurs when
individuals have an intense grief response that
lasts longer and eventually influences one’s
daily functioning. Mayland, Harding, Preston,
and Payne (2020) reviewed studies of prior pandemics and found that the multiplicity of the
losses, inability to say “goodbye,” and disruptions in the social connections all contributed to
complicated bereavement during pandemics.
They suggested that providing group connections and increasing support would help people
during COVID-19.
Groups have been used effectively to help
people cope with grief and loss (Maass, Hofmann, Perlinger, & Wagner, 2020; Piper,
Ogrodniczuk, Joyce, & Weideman, 2011). They
provide emotional support and hope and reduce
depression caused by isolation. Supiano,
Haynes, and Pond (2017) did a qualitative study
of members in a short-term grief group and
found they were able to help facilitate meaning
out of catastrophic grief experiences. During
COVID-19, online groups have been used to
provide support to health care providers (Wallace, Wladkowski, Gibson, & White, 2020) and
individuals struggling with the loss of a loved
one (Sun, Bao, & Lu, 2020). Wallace et al.
(2020) recommend online support groups for
those individuals providing palliative care for
those who are dying of COVID-19. Knowles,
Stelzer, Jovel, and O’Connor (2017) examined
the effectiveness of a virtual support group for
the elderly experiencing the loss of a spouse and
found that the members had better sleep, less
depression, less ruminations of the spouse, and
less loneliness after the group intervention.
Mayland et al. (2020) suggests that providing
technologically assisted social support during
illness, prior to death, and after the loss could
decrease complicated mourning. They recommend online group-related support during
COVID-19 that includes family gatherings and
religious rituals involving the community.
GROUP AND COVID-19 129
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.Restoration: Group Therapy Intervention
During COVID-19
When people are suffering, groups provide
healing. They bring hope, decrease isolation,
and connect us to something bigger than our
own pain and loneliness (Yalom & Leszcz,
2005). That is why it is not surprising that group
therapy is one of the most effective treatments
to restore us during and after COVID-19.
General Evidence of Group Therapy
Group therapy has been recently described as
a “triple E treatment” (Burlingame & Strauss, in
press; Yalom & Leszcz, 2005). It is effective,
equivalent, and efficient. Randomized clinical
trials (RCTs) have shown it to be effective when
contrasted with no-treatment controls. A recent
meta-analysis of nearly 50 RCTs that contrasted
individual and group therapy formats using
identical patients, treatments, and dose produced equivalent outcomes compared to individual treatment (Burlingame, Seebeck, Janis,
et al., 2016). Furthermore, equivalence also has
been found when group therapy is contrasted
with other bona fide treatments for common
anxiety and mood disorders (Burlingame &
Strauss, in press). Finally, when one considers
therapist time and treatment cost, group therapy
is a more efficient treatment when compared to
individual therapy (Burlingame et al., 2016).
COVID-19: Evidence Base for
Group Therapy
Global (WHO) and national health care agencies (CDC) have reported an increased prevalence of mental problems related to COVID-19
(Qiu et al. (2020); Zhang et al., 2020). Group
interventions may be an important option to
prevent and restore mental health problems related to this pandemic. A recent review (e.g.,
Burlingame & Strauss, in press) provides ample
evidence for the efficacy of group treatment
with respect to specific psychological disorders
that may be triggered by the pandemic. In general, findings from 329 randomized controlled
studies that treated 27,000 patients showed
large effects favoring group treatment over
waitlist controls and no differences to active
controls. What follows is a brief summary of
major conclusions regarding the efficacy of
group therapy for anxiety, trauma, mood, and
substance abuse disorders.
Obsessive– compulsive disorder (OCD).
Individuals suffering from OCD report aggravations of their symptoms, especially fear of
contamination and excessive washing of hands
during COVID-19 (Kumar & Somani, 2020).
The lack of inhibitory control as a result of the
pandemic and its consequences is seen as one of
the roots for the increase of symptoms needing
additional treatment options. As far as group
treatment is concerned, Schwartze, Barkowski,
Burlingame, Strauss, and Rosendahl (2016)
summarized three most commonly administered
group treatment comparisons in a meta-analysis
of 12 studies and 832 adult patients: complex
cognitive–behavioral group treatment (CBGT;
13), exposure with response prevention alone
(two), and cognitive therapy (one). No significant differences were found between group psychotherapy and active treatments (e.g., individual psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, or
common factors), and a similar pattern of findings was evident on secondary outcomes (depression, anxiety).
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
China indicated that PTSD is one of the mental
health consequences of COVID-19 (Tang et al.,
2020). For example, they reported the incidence
of traumatic stress in medical staff was 27% in
a sample of 230 nurses and doctors. The entire
sample, on average, scored high in the PTSD
self-rating scale (Huang & Zhao, 2020). In a
recent meta-analysis studying PTSD (Schwartze, Barkowski, Strauss, Knaevelsrud, & Rosendahl, 2019), 20 group treatment studies comprising 2,244 individuals diagnosed with PTSD
were summarized. As expected, the clinical
characteristics (e.g., trauma type, comorbidity,
severity of PTSD, personal background of participants) varied across studies. Nevertheless,
those receiving group treatment experienced
improvement in PTSD, anxiety, and depression
symptoms compared to no treatment (g  0.70).
Based on these studies, group psychotherapy
appears to be an efficacious treatment for
PTSD, although there are insufficient trials to
test for equivalence between group and individual treatment.
Anxiety disorders. Reports so far indicate
an increase of anxiety and panic symptoms and
anxiety disorders as an immediate consequence
of the COVID-19 pandemic (Huang & Zhao,
130 MARMAROSH, FORSYTH, STRAUSS, AND BURLINGAME
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.2020; Rajkumar, 2020), raising the question of
how effective treatments for patients suffering
from panic and combined anxiety disorders can
benefit from group treatments. The effects of
CBGT were assessed in a recent meta-analysis
comprising RCTs of group treatments for panic
disorder (Schwartze et al., 2017). A large effect
for CBGT was found on panic and agoraphobia
symptoms when compared to no-treatment controls (g  1.08), and no differences were found
when CBGT was compared to treatments (g 
0.18) including individual therapy. Over three
fourths (78%) of patients were panic-free after
group psychotherapy compared to 33% in the
waitlist control condition. Thus, CBGT appears
to be a robust treatment for panic disorder.
Major depressive disorder (MDD). As
with the other psychological disorders, an increase of depressive symptoms and depressive
disorders is expected and described following
the outbreak of COVID-19 (Huang & Zhao,
2020; Rajkumar, 2020; Tang et al., 2020). It is
assumed that the feeling of a lack of control
paired with the consequences of social and
physical distancing directly affects the mood of
individuals especially in countries and regions
with high rates of cases and deaths due to the
virus. Janis, Svien, Jensen, and Burlingame (in
press) pooled the findings from 35 studies (47
comparisons) and 2,918 individuals diagnosed
with MDD who were treated with group treatment, treatment as usual (TAU), medication, or
no treatment. The most frequent treatment was
CBGT (14), followed by mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy (MBCT; six) and psychoeducational groups (PEGs; six). The combined
effect of group treatment on depression symptoms was large (g  .86) when compared to no
treatment, with patients being nearly 7 times
more likely to have improved by the end of
treatment. There was strong support for CBGT
and promising evidence supporting both MBCT
and PEGs when compared to no-treatment controls.
Substance abuse disorders (SUDs). An
increase of substance abuse, especially alcohol,
has been assumed to be a consequence of
COVID-19 (Clay & Parker, 2020; Galea, Merchant, & Lurie, 2020). Ornell et al. (2020) advocate a reinforcement of addiction care for
several reasons: Individuals with SUD are considered to be a population at risk for contamination (e.g., due to their clinical and psychosocial condition), and these individuals are also
expected to have problems with treatment access as well as adherence due to the changes in
social life and economy caused by the pandemic.
Recently, a meta-analysis of RCTs focusing
on SUDs in adults (Lo Coco et al., 2019) summarized 33 studies comprising 34 comparisons
with nine studies comparing group to notreatment controls, seven comparing group to
individual therapy, and 18 comparing group
treatment to other treatments (e.g., twelve-steps,
TAU). The group treatments included cognitive
behavioral therapy, behavioral, mindfulness, dialectical behavior therapy, and integrated treatments. Group treatment outperformed individual therapy with moderate effects.
Groups and facilitating immune functioning. Moreover, there may be added benefit beyond the traditional psychological outcomes given recent evidence on the impact of
group treatments on the immune system
(Shields, Spahr, & Slavich, 2020). An understandable consequence of the pandemic is an
increase of general and specific stress for individuals in countries with a high prevalence of
COVID-19 infections. During stress, the sympathetic nervous system suppresses antiviral
processes and up-regulates proinflammatory
processes via the neurotransmitter norepinephrine (Slavich & Irwin, 2014). Stress responses
keep us in a constant state of fight or flight
(Sapolsky, 2004). Further, there is evidence for
psychosocial stress suppressing cellular and humoral immunity and increasing nonspecific inflammation (Segerstrom & Miller, 2004; Slavich & Irwin, 2014).
Psychosocial interventions appear to exert a
positive effect on immunity (Kim & Su, 2020).
A recent meta-analysis by Shields et al. (2020)
documents psychosocial intervention’s impact
on the immune system, which is causally involved in 50% of deaths worldwide (Furman
et al., 2019). Shields et al. also demonstrated
that group interventions were equally if not
more effective than individual therapy. The social milieu that groups provide may be a “motivator” to encourage attendance, which in turn
adds a supportive social environment linked to
health-related biomarkers. This social milieu
creates an opportunity to interact with affected
peers and experience therapeutic factors such as
the instillation of hope, universality, altruism,
GROUP AND COVID-19 131
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.interpersonal feedback, and cohesion that have
been empirically linked to better outcomes.
Online Group Therapy: Adjusting to
COVID-19
Although the online modes of group therapy
have existed, it has grown exponentially with
COVID-19 (Aafjes-van Doorn, Békès, & Prout,
2020; APA, 2020; Burlingame, Strauss, &
Joyce, 2013). As therapists shift to telehealth
during COVID-19, it is important to examine
the current group research, benefits, and limits
to online group interventions (Weinberg, 2020).
Synchronous groups. Synchronous online
groups consist of chat rooms as well as live
group conferences where participants meet with
each other and the therapist. The efficacy of
these interventions has been tested in several
RCTs with larger samples made up of different
clinical problems (eating disorders, depression,
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, cancer,
social anxiety disorder, and being a victim of
family violence). Some studies support their
efficacy when compared to waitlist or TAU
conditions (e.g., Crisp, Griffiths, Mackinnon,
Bennett, & Christensen, 2014; van der Zanden,
Kramer, Gerrits, Cuijpers, 2012), while others
indicate format equivalence when compared to
asynchronous group treatments (Burlingame &
Strauss, in press). Users commonly report a
high degree of satisfaction and indicate that the
online group was an important source to increase coping (Hopf, Grange, Moessner, &
Bauer, 2013; Stephen et al., 2013). These are
the types of groups being used now during
COVID-19.
Benefits and limitations of online groups.
Internet-based (group) treatments can be less
stigmatizing, especially for young people and
those with limited access to psychosocial support. Moreover, the average amount of therapist
weekly time per participant can be significantly
reduced (up to 71%) when compared to traditional CBGT (Schulz et al., 2016) and equally
effective (Tate et al., 2017). These benefits are
balanced by other ethical challenges regarding
confidentiality. Weinberg and Rolnick (2019)
described evidence that screen relations may
reduce interpersonal connections (e.g., Russell,
2015) and highlighted obstacles when one shifts
from traditional group practice to the screen.
These include (a) loss of control, (b) limited
bodily interactions, (c) inability to read and
respond to verbal and nonverbal signals, and (d)
the meaning of a member’s background—if it
should be considered or ignored. In short, we
are still building what good practice means and
for whom these groups even might be adverse
or harmful (Weinberg & Rolnick, 2019).
Despite the limitations, video conferences in
times of COVID-19 seem to be accepted and
perceived as helpful by patients and providers
(e.g., Liu et al., 2020). There is evidence to
suggest that online support groups help those
who are quarantined during disease outbreaks.
Pan, Chang, and Yu (2005) found that having an
online support group and feeling connected to
others who had been through the same situation
was validating, and it provided people with the
support they needed. Indeed, the scientific literature on videoconferencing is more plentiful on
individual (Backhaus et al., 2012; Rees & Maclaine, 2015) rather than group treatment. The
pandemic already has begun to produce more
publications on online group treatment (Dehkordi, Sakhi, Gholamzad, Azizpor, & Shahini,
2020), and the sustainability of an online group
treatment using different theoretical orientations is an open question.
Implications
It is critical that we examine the group-level
processes pertaining to the prevention, maintenance, and restoration during COVID-19. Although we often are aware of the individual
factors that are emphasized as we navigate this
pandemic, the social factors are equally important. Group dynamics influence the tension we
see when people are ambivalent about wearing
masks or social distancing, the ways people
cope with social isolation, and the ways groups
can provide relief from depression, anxiety,
substance abuse, and loss.
Working Together to Cope With
COVID-19
Groups also bring together different disciplines to understand the diverse challenges
ahead of us as we endure COVID-19 (Holmes et
al., 2020). According to O’Connor et al. (2020),
it requires a group of researchers and clinicians
across professions to address the impact of
COVID-19. No single disciple can tackle this
132 MARMAROSH, FORSYTH, STRAUSS, AND BURLINGAME
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.issue in isolation. It requires psychology, psychiatry, neuroscience, epidemiology, and infectious disease specialists to work together. They
also argue that there needs to be collaboration
between the public, patients, health care providers, and policymakers and a cohesive focused
research agenda that can influence policy and
practice. Group is indeed a specialty within
psychology that will help us navigate people’s
psychological and physical well-being, increase
successful health care delivery, fight systemic
injustices, develop public policy, and work together to develop a vaccination for COVID-19.
Group Leadership During COVID-19
One of the most valuable lessons we learned
from the research on cohesion is the role of the
leader in facilitating successful group dynamics.
Burlingame et al. (2002) described the many
things leaders can do to facilitate successful
group process and outcome such as modeling
interpersonal feedback, helping members tolerate conflict, embracing vulnerability, and discussing clear goals for the group. Research findings suggest that it is also important to
empathize with members (Johnson et al., 2005)
and be supportive when members are distressed
(Davidovitz et al., 2007). It is important for
political leaders and health care leaders to be
aware that the public is needing support, direction, and empathy during the pandemic.
Group Psychotherapy and Online Groups
One of the most important messages is that
group psychotherapy is an effective treatment,
as effective as individual psychotherapy (Burlingame, Seebeck, Janis, et al., 2016), and that it
is an important treatment for those suffering
during COVID-19. Individuals with anxiety,
depression, grief, loneliness, and substance
abuse can get help during the pandemic with
online therapy group interventions. Although
we are only beginning to understand the differences between online group therapy and faceto-face treatment, we are seeing the benefits of
being able to reach out to diverse populations
while ensuring the safety of people who are
isolating to prevent the spread of the virus. Our
ability to engage socially while also protecting
ourselves from illness makes online groups one
of the most important resources during the
COVID-19 pandemic.




NEW PAPER




Journal of Research in Psychology, 2(1); 1-3
Copyright © 2020 Authors. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, 
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
1
Journal of Research in Psychology (JRP)
www.readersinsight.net/jrp
ISSN: 2664-9500 (Online)
ISSN: 2664-9497 (Print)
Editorial:
Psychology of Preventive Behavior for COVID-19 outbreak
Farhan Sarwar1
, Siti Aisyah Panatik2
, Farhat Sarwar3
1Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, University of Education, Lahore
2School of Human Resource Development and Psychology, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
3Clinical Psychologist
Abstract
The biggest challenge humanity is facing right now is to curtail the outspread of COVID-19. To make this 
successful, people need to adopt precautions of social interaction and health hygiene, as recommended by 
WHO. Recent evidence indicates that the public tends to take a casual approach towards this 
recommendation, especially those which pertain to social distancing. Using the health belief model as a 
guiding theory, we recommend public awareness campaigns to focus on creating awareness regarding the 
potential benefits of the preventive approach, seriousness, and susceptibility of disease. Besides, authorities 
should also create an environment so that people face fewer barriers in adopting preventive measures. We 
also highlighted the potential role of positive psychology during COVID-19. 
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.31580/
jrp.v2i1.1370
Keywords: COVID-19, Preventive Behavior, Health Belief Model, Awareness Campaign, Social Distancing © Readers Insight Publication 
Although the pandemic COVID-19 caused by the SARS-COV-2 
virus is not the first in the 21st century, it has already surpassed the 
outreach and death toll of all previous pandemics. According to the 
WHO situation report published on 7th May 2020, there are 
approximately 3.5 million cases of COVID-19 and 250 thousand deaths 
worldwide. Even though there is about 86% similarity between the 
genetic structures of SARS, which first appeared in 2003 (LeDuc and 
Barry, 2004) and SARS-COV-2, the latter has proven to be highly 
contagious. Not only does it transfer through direct body contact or 
being very close to the infected patients, but there are also indications 
that it can transfer within 6 to 12 feet of contact (Lai et al., 2020). Initial 
evidence also indicated that it could survive on inanimate objects, and 
a person can catch the virus if it touches the contaminated surface. 
Although the virus cannot penetrate the skin, yet if the contaminated 
hands touch the mouth, nose, or eyes, one can easily get infected 
(Centers for Disease Control, 2020). 
Early experiences with other types of recent outbreaks involving 
novel viruses such as MERS (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome), 
SARS, Swine Flu, H1N1, and others have taught us that "being 
prepared" is just an illusion. When faced with a new type of virus, 
countries are always looking for new but urgent public health strategies 
to minimize and eventually contain the spread of the pandemic. 
However, all sorts of the epidemics that involve highly communicable 
viruses have shown that an individual needs to play an essential role in 
the containment and mitigation of the spread (Leung et al., 2005), 
especially when there is no vaccination as in the case of COVID-19 
(Wang et al., 2020). Therefore, international and local health agencies, 
as well as governments, are emphasizing the citizens to follow the 
precautionary guidelines as recommended by the World Health 
Organization. These guidelines for unaffected individuals include 
thoroughly washing hands with soap or alcoholic sanitizer; maintaining 
a minimum of three feet (six feet is preferred) distance with another 
person at a social place; covering the face (with tissue or elbow) when 
coughing or sneezing and hence maintaining a good respiratory 
hygiene; avoiding crowded places, and to the extent possible 
maintaining social isolation by staying at home. For those who feel 
they have symptoms of some respiratory disease such as fever, cough,
or difficulty in breathing, the direction given is to contact health 
professionals (Wilder-Smith et al., 2020). 
COVID-19 is significantly different from many previous 
contamination diseases due to its unlimited infectious period, severe 
transmissibility, clinical severity, and the extent of its spread in the 
community. Even a healthy individual can be a passive carrier and 
responsible for the transmission of disease in the community. That is 
why social isolation, as a crucial means and effective way of breaking 
the chain of infection (Huremović, 2019), is suggested for the entire 
community (or country) rather than for the infected individuals only. 
Governments, all over the world, are putting their best efforts to 
mitigate the disease. They have taken steps such as imposing 
lockdowns, closing airports, restricting social gatherings and 
movements, and establishing health care and quarantine facilities (Ren 
et al., 2020). In addition, various awareness campaigns are launched to 
educate the public about COVID-19 and the importance of adopting 
precautionary measures against it. But can the governments maintain 
lockdowns for a long time? It is not possible as it is hurting the 
economy. Trade and commerce activities have come to a halt,
consequently giving rise to unemployment and reduction in income 
(Wilder-Smith et al., 2020). International Monetary Fund (2020) 
estimates that the current recession is comparable to the great recession 
that occurred in the 1920s. Governments need to make a balance 
between their lives and livelihoods. Many countries have decided to 
relax lockdown restrictions. So there will be resuming of some 
economic and social activities too. In such a scenario, the role of an 
individual to prevent themselves from the prevalent disease is going to 
be undoubtedly very important. Journal of Research in Psychology, 2(1); 1-3
Copyright © 2020 Authors. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, 
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
2
With the relaxation in the restrictions of lockdown, new operating 
rules, including social distancing, are being established for the safety 
of the people with the warning that failure to take precautionary action 
can lead to the severity of the situation and then people will be in 
lockdown once more. Here some questions arise. Is it possible for 
people to resume social and economic activities while maintaining 
some form of social distancing and healthy practices to limit the 
outbreak? And when hope and worry are being mingled, would they 
be able to cope with the situation mentally and psychologically? It 
seems most of the community is feeling relaxed with the relaxation in 
the lockdown restrictions. There are two reasons that people are not 
letting go the social life. First is that they do not understand the gravity 
of the situation and want to enjoy their social freedom, as we witnessed 
in some of the developed countries like the U.S.A. and Europe (Pinkser, 
2020). The last pandemic of nearly such intensity occurred a century 
ago; the contemporary public cannot comprehend the disastrous 
aftermath an exponential spread of disease can result in. Adjustment 
and anchoring heuristics can be used to explain this judgmental bias in 
this type of scenario. The second possible reason is that there are people 
who have a challenge of survival when there is no income. For them,
the disease would not be the priority but to feed themselves and their 
families. 
Media plays a vital role in sharing information all around the world 
as well as in regulating the emotions of the public. It often happens that 
it corrupts the message with wrong details, manipulates the perception, 
or using a sensational tone, which stokes unnecessary fear and panic 
among the public. The reactions and responses of media coverage of 
the current ongoing outbreak of Coronavirus are variant. On the one 
hand, there is an attack of anxiety and restlessness in people who are 
hyper-vigilant and over-cautious. News about the spread of pandemic 
gives them the understanding that they are facing a traumatic event. 
They experience headaches, muscle aches, and stomach-aches. Their 
sleeping and eating pattern disrupts.
On the other hand, some people do not take the news seriously as 
they already have low trust in media and aware of the notoriety of 
media information. It was observed that such individuals, even in some 
developed countries like the U.S.A. and parts of Europe, were not 
willing to let go of their social interactions even during the high peak 
of pandemic in their countries. They might spread the virus 
unknowingly. 
In addition to imposing rules and regulations regarding social 
interactions, authorities can launch large scale interventions to educate 
the masses towards adopting a preventive lifestyle. Public health 
agencies can utilize the psychologist to design awareness campaigns so 
that the public willingly follow all the protocols of social interaction 
that are required to minimize the spread of COVID-19. A preventive 
health behavior framework that can provide the guidelines in this 
regard is the health belief model (HBM: Rosenstock, 1974). In H.B.M., 
there are four determinants of preventive health behavior, perceived 
susceptibility (P-Sus), perceived severity (P-Sev), perceived benefits 
(P-ben), and perceived barriers (P-bar) to disease. P-Sus and P-Sev of 
the disease often enhance preventive behaviors by increasing an 
individual's threat appraisal for the disease. Until people are not aware 
of how serious the disease or the extent to which they are physically 
vulnerable to get infected, they would not be too eager to save 
themselves from COVID-19. P-Ben and P-Bar are collectively known 
as coping appraisals. If people are well aware of how beneficial it is for 
them to follow the precautionary protocols, there is a higher chance 
they would adopt those behaviors. Similarly, authorities need to create 
a supportive environment so that people perceive that there are low 
practical barriers in observing preventive behaviors. We recommend 
psychological researchers to explore this framework during the 
outbreak to test the efficacy of this model for COVID-19 preventive 
behavior. 
This is the time that governments need to mobilize all forms of 
communication mediums to create awareness among the public. People 
need to understand that there is no vaccination for COVID-19 (until 
now); neither lockdowns can be imposed much longer. In this regard, 
the media can be a useful tool, but it needs to understand a difference 
between sensational messages and false information, which creates 
largescale panic and informative news to enhance the four components 
of H.B.M. Although media helps create awareness, it often happens 
that it corrupts the message with wrong information or sensational tone, 
which creates unnecessary panic among the public. Dramatic and fake 
information often underplays the importance of media, especially 
social media, as a useful communication medium (Depoux et al., 2020). 
Regulatory authorities can keep a check and balance in this situation. 
We also suggest psychology researchers to explore the role of 
positive psychological characteristics during this pandemic. Previous 
research has shown that people who are high in health-based positive 
psychological capital are not only more satisfied with their health; they 
also have low B.M.I. and cholesterol levels (Luthans, Youssef, 
Sweetman, & Harms, 2013). It seems positive personality types such 
as psychological capital can act as a key resource in guiding individuals 
during the challenging times (Chen & Lim, 2012). It will enable them 
to handle the stressful situation with an optimistic, confident, hopeful 
and resilient mindset (Avey, Luthans, & Jensen, 2009) as a personality 
resource people with high psychological capital are excellent managers 
of resources. They can effectively utilize existing resources according 
to the prevalent situation and gather more useful resources for the 
future to use when demands arise (Teo, Roche, Pick, & Newton, 2014).
Coronavirus is a big challenge for a human being. People must be 
given a deep and thorough understanding of the deadly pandemic. They 
must be prepared for their current as well as prolonged post-pandemic 
effects on their lives and livings. Decisions of some countries are, to 
some extent, in the right direction. Restricted and extended lockdown 
is not the solution to this drastic scenario because it has proved to be
economically disastrous. The revival of social and economic activities 
is undeniable. Still, along with that, people should be well aware of
how they need to play their part and keep the balance in their outdoor 
activities and life-saving measures to protect themselves and their 
community. In that respect, the media and governing bodies are bound
to do their duties honestly and vigilantly in the welfare of human beings 
and humanities. 




NEW PAPER



EDITORIAL
Health Psychology in the Time of COVID-19
Kenneth E. Freedland1
, Mary Amanda Dew2
, David B. Sarwer3
, Matthew M. Burg4
, Trevor A. Hart5, 6,
Sarah W. Feldstein Ewing7
, Carolyn Y. Fang8
, Shelley A. Blozis9
, Eli Puterman10,
Becky Marquez11, and Peter G. Kaufmann12
1 Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis 2 Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 3 Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Temple University College of Public Health
4 Departments of Internal Medicine and Anesthesiology, Yale University School of Medicine 5 Department of Psychology, Ryerson University 6 Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto
7 Department of Psychology, University of Rhode Island 8 Cancer Prevention and Control Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States 9 Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis
10 School of Kinesiology, University of British Columbia 11 Department of Family Medicine and Public Health and School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego 12 College of Nursing, Villanova University
Health Psychology has received numerous papers over the past
several months on topics related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Many of them concern depression, anxiety, stress, or other forms
of distress in the general population or in health care workers. We
have received far fewer papers on COVID-related health behaviors
and health communications—factors that have played central roles
in the spread of the pandemic and that are major topics in health
psychology.
Our experience is consistent with the published scientific literature on the pandemic. A Medline search that we conducted in late
September yielded over 23,000 English-language articles pertaining to COVID-19. Over 1,400 of them concerned topics that are
within the scope of Health Psychology. As shown in Table 1,
COVID-related mental disorders comprised the largest category.
Many other studies concerned other forms of stress or emotional
distress. At least 248 articles addressed the profound ethnic and
racial disparities in COVID-19 infection and death rates and in
access to health care that are accentuating longstanding health
inequities; 22 (9%) of these articles addressed behavioral or psychosocial aspects of COVID-19 health disparities. Thus, the literature on the behavioral and psychosocial aspects of the pandemic
has been dominated, so far at least, by research on stress or
distress. Fewer reports have been published so far on critical
COVID-related health behaviors, health communication, or health
disparities.
The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) and other public health agencies around the world agree
that preventive health behaviors including social distancing, wearing masks, and hand washing are the keys to limiting SARSCoV-2 contagion, hospitalizations, and deaths, especially at a time
when effective vaccines are not yet available. These agencies have
identified a number of factors that increase vulnerability to SARSCoV-2 infection or that contribute to adverse outcomes, such as
obesity (Belanger et al., 2020; Tartof et al., 2020) and vaping
(Armatas et al., 2020; Dumas et al., 2020; “The EVALI Outbreak
and Vaping,” 2020) in which health behaviors also play critical
roles. They have also reported that the pandemic has created
interrelated crises of social isolation, psychiatric disorders, substance abuse, violence, and domestic abuse (Chandan et al., 2020;
Czeisler et al., 2020; Devi, 2020; Makaroun et al., 2020; Ragavan
et al., 2020; Roesch et al., 2020). These health-related behavioral
and psychosocial problems have been within the province of health
psychology since its inception as a specialty.
For these reasons, the field of health psychology has a special
responsibility to apply its expertise to the psychological and social
pathologies that are associated with the COVID-19 pandemic,
including problems like vaccine hesitancy, resistance to preventive
health behaviors such as wearing masks, and social isolation, to
name just a few. Health psychologists can also make important
contributions to solution-focused research to improve public health
communication strategies and to develop interventions for the
long-term sequelae of COVID-19.
We also have a responsibility to address the health disparities
that have long plagued racial and ethnic minority populations and
that have been exacerbated by the pandemic. Compared to the
COVID-19 pandemic, no other public health crisis has so rapidly
and convincingly demonstrated the tragic impacts of racial and
ethnic biases and other social determinants of health. A variety of
Kenneth E. Freedland X https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3118-9913
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Kenneth
E. Freedland, Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of
Medicine in St. Louis, 4320 Forest Park Avenue, Suite 301, St. Louis, MO
63108, United States. Email: freedlak@wustl.edu
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.
Health Psychology
© 2020 American Psychological Association 2020, Vol. 39, No. 12, 1021–1025
ISSN: 0278-6133 https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0001049
1021disadvantages such as poverty and limited access to health care
have placed people of color at elevated risk for poor health
outcomes over many decades. The CDC now recognizes that
discrimination also increases the risk of illness and death from
COVID-19 (National Center for Immunization and Respiratory
Diseases Division of Viral Diseases, 2020). Racism poses an
urgent threat to the health of minority communities, and it calls for
innovative solutions and actions. Health psychology must join this
battle and become part of the solution, without delay.
Health psychologists have been taking these responsibilities
very seriously (e.g., Arden & Chilcot, 2020; Garfin et al., 2020;
Williams et al., 2020). For example, health psychologists have
been working, often within multidisciplinary collaborations, on
strategies to reduce the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (Bogg &
Milad, 2020; Michie et al., 2020; Ruiz & Revenson, 2020; West et
al., 2020). They have had prominent roles in some of the most
informative early research on social and behavioral aspects of the
COVID-19 pandemic, such as in the International COVID-19
Awareness and Responses Evaluation project (Lejtenyi, 2020) and
in a study of the impact of the pandemic on physical activity in
children (Dunton et al., 2020). They have also started to address
psychosocial aspects of racial and ethnic disparities in COVID
susceptibility, care, and outcomes (e.g., Valenzuela et al., 2020;
Valrie et al., 2020).
On the contrary, some major reports on behavioral or psychosocial aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic have not included any
health psychologists as coauthors (e.g., Alsan et al., 2020; Bavel et
al., 2020; Shook et al., 2020). Their absence suggests that we may
need to do more to increase our visibility within the scientific
community and our participation in this vital research.
The same could be said about health psychology in the public
arena. Experts who can address the behavioral and psychosocial
aspects of the pandemic have been in great demand on news and
talk shows, newspapers, and social media. Psychologists have been
called upon many times to offer insights and advice for coping
with the pandemic, but with few exceptions (e.g., Keilar, 2020),
those who appear are usually not specialists in health psychology.
On September 9, 2020, for example, CNN ran a story under the
headline, “The Psychology Behind Why Some College Students
Break COVID-19 Rules” (Andrew, 2020). Although this story
focused on health risk behaviors, the reporter spoke with a developmental psychologist, a counseling psychologist, and a clinical
psychologist, but not with a health psychologist. Similarly, the
expert panelists at a CNN coronavirus town hall on May 21, 2020
(Cooper & Gupta, 2020) included a school psychologist and a
professor of psychology with a background in neuroscience, but
not a health psychologist.
It is understandable that the media, government agencies, school
systems, and health care organizations would turn to developmental and school psychologists for questions about the effects of the
pandemic on children, or to clinical and counseling psychologists
for questions about COVID-related mental health problems. It is
also appropriate for experts who are not psychologists to be asked
to weigh in on certain behavioral or psychosocial aspects of the
pandemic, such as when political scientists, law enforcement officials, and public health experts are asked why irate customers
would attack frontline workers for promoting compliance with
masking mandates at retail stores (MacFarquhar, 2020). Nevertheless, we believe that more could be done to ensure that health
psychologists are high on the list of experts that reporters, policymakers, and others in the public arena will call upon to address
questions about the behavioral and psychosocial aspects of the
COVID-19 pandemic as well as other public health problems and
concerns.
How we see ourselves helps to determine how others see us.
Since its inception, the field of health psychology has been preoccupied with prevalent chronic diseases such as obesity, diabetes,
heart disease, and cancer, and we have paid less attention to
infectious diseases. For example, only about 8% of the thousands
of papers that have been published in Health Psychology have
focused on infectious diseases or vaccination-related topics. Most
of these reports concern HIV/AIDS (e.g., Fisher et al., 2006; Fisher
et al., 1996; Hatzenbuehler et al., 2008; Safren et al., 2009) or other
sexually transmitted diseases (STDs; e.g., Corbin & Fromme, 2002;
Widman et al., 2014); only about one fifth of them focused on other
infectious diseases. This could help to explain why scientists from
other fields, policymakers, or reporters might overlook health psychologists when they need to engage experts in behavioral and psychosocial aspects of infectious diseases.
The good news is that health psychologists have shown much
more interest in infectious diseases and vaccination-related issues
in the past decade than was evident before then. Of all the papers
ever published in Health Psychology on vaccination-related issues
or infectious diseases other than STDs, 54% have been published
since 2010. Similarly, across all of the highest-impact European
and North American health psychology journals, 53% of the papers that have focused on these topics have been published since
2010. The highest impact pre-COVID papers focused on protective
health behaviors during pandemics (Bish & Michie, 2010), vaccination (Betsch & Sachse, 2013; Bish et al., 2011; Ernsting et al.,
2013; Gerend et al., 2013; Hornsey et al., 2018; Keenan et al.,
2012; Krawczyk et al., 2012; Mantzari et al., 2015), overutilization
of antibiotics (Sirota et al., 2017), hand hygiene (King et al., 2016),
susceptibility to viral challenge (Miller et al., 2016), the Ebola
epidemic (Idoiaga Mondragon et al., 2017), the H1N1 flu pandemic (Karademas et al., 2013), and infections in cancer patients
(Ruel et al., 2015).
The upsurge of interest in these topics is traceable to a series of
disconcerting developments including successive epidemics of
Table 1
English-Language Articles on COVID-19 in Medline as of
September 20, 2020
No. Topic Count
1 Health behavior 279
2 Health communication 65
3 Mental disorders 727
4 Stress, psychological 363
5 Behavioral symptoms NOT stress, psychological 217
6 Subtotal (no. 1 OR no. 2 OR no. 3 OR no. 4 OR no. 5) 1,439
7 Health status disparities OR healthcare disparities 248
8 Behavioral or psychosocial topic AND disparities (no. 6
AND no. 7)
22
Note. The categories listed in this table are Medline Medical Subject
Heading (MeSH) terms. The behavioral/psychosocial subtotal is 1,439
rather than 1,651 because 212 of these articles were indexed with 2
MeSH terms.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.
1022 FREEDLAND ET AL.emerging infectious diseases, overutilization of antibiotics, and the
spread of vaccination hesitancy and antivaccination movements.
Our interest increased exponentially this year when our lives and
those of everyone around us were turned upside down, or in some
cases ended, by the COVID-19 pandemic. A growing list of
publications on behavioral and psychosocial aspects of the
COVID-19 pandemic in such high-impact journals as The Lancet
(Betsch et al., 2020) and Nature Human Behavior (Bavel et al.,
2020; Betsch, 2020) provides evidence of psychologists’ increasing visibility in work on infectious diseases and vaccination.
This is the right time to consider how the field of health
psychology can build on these developments. If there were a larger
and more visible cadre of health psychologists who specialized in
novel communicable diseases, the behavioral aspects of epidemics,
or the psychology of vaccine hesitancy, they would probably be on
speed dial at national and local media outlets at a time like this.
However, these professionals might have a challenging career path
if they were to specialize too narrowly in epidemics or pandemics.
The world has not experienced anything like COVID-19 since the
1918 flu pandemic, over 100 years ago. It seems less difficult to
build a research career or a clinical practice around the behavioral
or psychosocial aspects of obesity, diabetes, heart disease, or
cancer— conditions that are with us in large numbers every day—
than around pandemics and life-threatening epidemics that confront us only sporadically.
Despite this challenge, we believe that there are viable ways for
interested health psychologists to develop special expertise, deep
knowledge, recognition, and public visibility as experts in the
behavioral and psychosocial aspects of infectious diseases. The
development of this new subspecialty within health psychology
would be consistent with a recent call for an integrated approach to
agent, host, environmental, and behavioral factors in emerging
infectious diseases (Morens & Fauci, 2020). It would build on
adjacent areas in which health psychologists already have special
expertise such as HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases (e.g., Feldstein Ewing & Bryan, 2020; Hart et al., 2017),
vaccination (e.g., Ayling et al., 2019; Bednarczyk, 2018), adherence (Bassett et al., 2019; Cornelius et al., 2018; Gathright et al.,
2017), and health disparities (Harkness et al., 2020; Hostinar et al.,
2017; Lee et al., 2017). Subspecialty training opportunities could
be developed at pre- and postdoctoral levels in departments of
psychology, psychiatry, and medicine and in health behavior divisions at schools of public health. In addition to providing a
subspecialization path for trainees with a special interest in infectious diseases, pre- and postdoctoral training programs in health
psychology should consider placing a greater emphasis across the
board on infectious diseases, public health, prevention, and health
inequities.
Finally, health psychology organizations must create more opportunities for health psychologists to apply and disseminate their
expertise in the behavioral and psychosocial aspects of infectious
diseases, vaccine hesitancy, and related problems. They should
work to ensure that health psychologists with special expertise are
visible and available when government agencies, health care organizations, or media representatives need experts in the behavioral and psychosocial aspects of infectious diseases or vaccination. We hope that health psychology organizations and training
centers will recognize the need for concerted efforts to strengthen
our role in the current pandemic and in the succession of epidemics
we will surely face in the years ahead.



NEW PAPER


Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Annals of Medicine and Surgery
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/amsu
Is the lockdown important to prevent the COVID-19 pandemic? Effects on
psychology, environment and economy-perspective
Abdulkadir Atalan
Department of Industrial Engineering, Gaziantep Islam, Science and Technology University, 27010, Gaziantep, Turkey
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
COVID-19
Lockdown
Correlation
Psychology
Environment
Economy
ABSTRACT
COVID-19's daily increasing cases and deaths have led to worldwide lockdown, quarantine and some restrictions.
This study aims to analyze the effect of lockdown days on the spread of coronavirus in countries. COVID-19 cases
and lockdown days data were collected for 49 countries that implemented the lockdown between certain dates
(without interruption). The correlation tests were used for data analysis based on unconstrained (normal) and
constrained (Tukey-lambda). The lockdown days was significantly correlated with COVID-19 pandemic based on
unconstrained (r = −0.9126, F-ratio = 6.1654; t-ratio = 2.40; prob > .0203 with 49 observations) and based
on Tukey-lambda (r = 0.7402, λ = 0.14). The lockdown, one of the social isolation restrictions, has been
observed to prevent the COVID-19 pandemic, and showed that the spread of the virus can be significantly
reduced by this preventive restriction in this study. This study offers initial evidence that the COVID-19 pandemic can be suppressed by a lockdown. The application of lockdown by governments is also thought to be
effective on psychology, environment and economy besides having impact on Covid-19.
1. Introduction
A disease similar to pneumonia cases began to emerge in Wuhan
City, Hubei Province, China in December 2019 [1,2]. The studies revealed that the cases that emerged were a new type of coronavirus that
was not previously described. This form of the virus was called Coronavirus 2019, or COVID-19, since it appeared in 2019 [3]. The source
of this virus is thought to be the Huanan seafood market in Wuhan,
China. It was understood in time that the virus, which is transmitted
from animal to human, can spread from human to human.
Although the molecular mechanism of COVID-19 transmission
pathway from human to human is still not resolved, the principle of
transmission of respiratory diseases is similar in general [4]. Respiratory diseases are spread by droplet scattering. In this type of
spreading, a sick person is exposed to this microbe to people around
him by coughing or sneezing. In other words, environmental factors
play an important role in the transmission of this virus [5].
The COVID-19 outbreak is spreading very fast every day and more
than 4 million people have been actively infected by this virus so
COVID-19 restrictions are applied in almost all areas of life [6]. The
most basic measure to reduce the spread of coronavirus or to prevent
infection is to follow hygiene rules [7]. The most important of these is
washing hands. For this reason, the spread of this virus is slower in
societies that have the habit of washing hands and pay attention to the
general hygiene rules [8]. There is a high level of participation in the
"stay at home" call by official institutions. Scientists warn that the
COVID-19 virus can reach any age group quickly [1,9].
Approximately 214 countries reported the number of confirmed
COVID-19 cases [10]. Countries have taken very strict restrictions such
as vacation for schools, working from home, quarantine for regions
with high number of cases, and most importantly, lockdown to slow
down the COVID 19 outbreak. The lockdown days differ by countries.
Countries have set the days when the lockdown started and ended according to the COVID-19 effect on their public. Some countries have
extended the lockdown by many days due to COVID-19 continues its
influence intensely on the public. Chakraborty and Maity have emphasized that the lockdown has both environmental and economic
impact on countries. The lockdown has created the ground for renewal
of the environment, especially with the closure of factories and the
reduction of both private and public transportation vehicles used.
COVID-19 increased the air quality in many parts of the world with the
lockdown imposed during the pandemic process [9]. Due to the lockdown, economic activities have stopped reducing carbon emissions
[11].
To prevent this pandemic, governments have started to apply bans
under many social restrictions. Lockdown is at the forefront of these
restrictions. The aim of this study is to analyze statistically that the
lockdown plays an important role in preventing COVID-19 and to show
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amsu.2020.06.010
Received 5 June 2020; Accepted 7 June 2020
E-mail address: abdulkadiratalan@gmail.com.
Annals of Medicine and Surgery 56 (2020) 38–42
Available online 14 June 2020
2049-0801/ © 2020 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of IJS Publishing Group Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Tits psychological effect on people. This study used COVID-19 data from
49 countries to analyze the impact of the lockdown to slow down the
COVID-19 outbreak. Countries that do not constantly enforce the
lockdown are not included in this study. The correlation tests were used
for data analysis based on unconstrained (normal) and constrained
(Tukey-lambda).
This study includes five sections. The first section deals with the
literature review of studies related to COVID-19 pandemic. The second
part gives detailed information about the methodology of the study.
The results obtained from the method mentioned in the methodology
section are discussed in the third section. An overview of the psychological, environmental, and economic impacts of the lockdown imposed
in countries due to COVID-19 is discussed in the fourth section. In the
last section, conclusion about the study has been provided.
2. Methodology
COVID-19 case data of the countries considered were collected from
www.worldometer.com [6]. A total number of 3726797 million confirmed active COVID-19 cases have been documented worldwide as of
May 5, 2020. The number of approved active COVID-19 cases in
countries considered for this study was recorded as 1440776 as of May
5, 2020. COVID-19 cases and lockdown days data were collected for 49
countries that implemented the lockdown between certain dates
(without interruption). The lockdown days of the countries were obtained from the websites of the official institutions of each country.
The correlation test was used to analyze the associations between
lockdown days factor and total cases of COVID-19 by countries. The
correlation of the lockdown on the number of COVID-19 cases was
calculated as unconstrained (normal) and unconstrained (Tukeylambda distribution) in two ways. The distribution of Tukey-Lambda
has the shape parameter λ. The Tukey-Lambda distribution is created
with a position parameter, μ and a scale parameter, σ. This is because
the general form of probability functions is expressed in terms of
standard normal distribution. Values less than this mean (0.14) a
heavy-tailed distribution (−1 is close to a Approx. Cauchy). That is, as
the optimal value of λ increases from 0.14 to −1, progressively heavy
tails are implied. Similarly, as the optimal value of λ becomes greater
than 0.14, shorter tails are implied. The Tukey-lambda distribution is
expressed mathematically in Eq. (1).
G p = p p ( ; ) (1 )
(1)
Fig. 1 shows the total number of COVID-19 cases by 49 countries.
Most of the countries considered are located in the European region
including Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain. Although COVID appeared in 19 China, the
European region has become the epicenter of the virus, and more cases
have emerged in Europe than in China. The highest case of COVID-19
from selected countries occurred in Spain, 250561 COVID-19 cases on
May 5, 2020. Italy announced its first approved COVID-19 case on
January 31, 2020.The country with the lowest COVID-19 case is
Paraguay, 461 COVID-19 cases on May 5, 2020.
Fig. 2 shows the days of lockdown imposed by 49 countries. Some of
these countries continue the lockdown. However, the last day of lockdown in these countries was accepted as 5 May 2020 for this study. The
Ireland, which has been curfewed for 68 days, has the longest lockdown
period. A total of 21983 COVID-19 cases were approved as of May 5,
2020 in Ireland. Spain, the country with the highest number of cases,
has been imposed lockdown for 53 days (see Fig. 3).
Although China became the center in the first days of the epidemic,
Italy passed China with the emerging cases. Even though Italy suffered
a severe injury in this pandemic, Italy have managed to control the
number of COVID-19 cases with the lockdown for a long time. On the
other hand, although there is a downward trend in new cases confirmed
in France and Spain, the number of cases confirmed in Spain has exceeded the number of cases confirmed in Italy.
Descriptive analyses were implemented for all the data. The statistical test was two-sided, and a value p < 0.05 was measured for model
and parameter statistically significant based on the fit regression model.
The data used for the study were analyzed using JMP Pro software
(version 15.0), Numbers and Minitab 18.0 statistical computer program.
3. Results and discussions
Descriptive analyses were presented for all the data used in this
study in Table 1. The results of the descriptive analyses were prompted
as 95% confidence intervals for upper and lower mean in lockdown
days and total cases of COVID-19. The statistical test was two-sided, and
a value p < 0.05 was measured for model and parameter statistically
significant.
The data set used is not suitable for normal distribution according to
Anderson-Darling (the value of AD was 9.376 and p-value of AndersonDarling test was 0.0003) and Shapiro-Wilk (the value of W was 0.728
and p-value of Shapiro-Wilk test was 0.010) normality tests. Statistical
processes were performed by transforming COVID-19 data. The transformed COVID-19 data using full Box-Cox transformation method
Fig. 1. Cumulative confirmed COVID-19 cases by countries.
A. Atalan Annals of Medicine and Surgery 56 (2020) 38–42
39(
for all : T(y) (y 1) / = , where the value of T(y) is the transformation of the observation data
y
; the value of shows the power to
which all observation data to be increased) is limited between 4.4263
and 6.7749 to adapt to the normal distribution (see Fig. 1.).
A correlation analysis was made between the spread of the COVID19 pandemic and lockdown. The correlation value varies between −1
and +1. The correlation value of a factor indicates that it has a negative
relationship as it approaches −1, and a positive relationship as it approaches +1. The lockdown has been found to have a very strong
correlation on approved COVID-19 cases. The unconstrained correlation value was calculated as −0.9126. Fig. 4 shows the Tukey-Lambda
correlation curve for normality test.
The Tukey-Lambda distribution forms a distribution family that can
approach the normal distribution. The maximum correlation of lockdown and COVID 19 case numbers occurred for the λ value of 0.14
(r = 0.7402), and COVID-19 data was modeled according to a normal
distribution (see Table 2).
The period of lockdown applied by 49 countries on average have
taken 35.38 days. A lockdown was imposed for a minimum of 3 days
while a lockdown was imposed for a maximum of 68 days by countries.
During this period, an average of 29403 people in these countries were
actively infected with COVID-19 virus. The number of confirmed
COVID-19 cases was recorded as a minimum of 431 and a maximum of
250561. Predictive statistics of COVID-19 data and lockdown of the
mentioned countries are given in Table 3. A minimum of 30
Fig. 2. COVID-19 pandemic lockdown days by countries.
Fig. 3. Transformed COVID-19 data.
Table 1
Descriptive statistics data on Lockdown days and COVID-29 cases.
Lockdown Days Cases
Mean 35.367347 29403.592
Std Dev 13.080988 57887.549
Std Err Mean 1.8687126 8269.6499
Upper 95% Mean 39.124645 46030.837
Lower 95% Mean 31.610049 12776.346
N 49.000000 49.000000
Variance 171.11224 000003.35
Skewness 0.3677305 2.6740095
Kurtosis −0.523178 6.3728059
Minimum 14.000000 431.00000
Maximum 68.000000 250561.00
A. Atalan Annals of Medicine and Surgery 56 (2020) 38–42
40observations are required to create an effective statistical analysis. In
this study, 49 data were used to calculate the lockdown in the aforementioned countries in the spread of COVID-19 pandemic with 95%
relative confidence intervals (t-ratio = −0.83; F ratio = 5.7639;
prob = 0.0413; adjusted R2 = 0.7212). It has been observed that the
developed model was found important according to the statistical
analyses. The lockdown parameter is significant at p < .05, so the data
is very close to zero at 95.0% confidence level (t-ratio = 2.40; F
ratio = 6.1614; prob = 0.0203).
The healthcare system capacities of countries have serious concerns
about meeting the needs of infected COVID-19 patients. Therefore,
countries have to take the strictest measures necessary to slow down or
even stop this pandemic. Otherwise, this situation triggers the intensive
care units to be at their maximum level in these countries. Although the
number of infected patients is very high in Spain and Italy, the number
of cases decreased significantly in recent days. This situation is also
found in other countries. As a result of the strict measures taken, governments plan to return normal life gradually in the countries mentioned. As a result, an absolute decrease in the number of cases will
occur if there is no possibility of virus mutation.
4. Effects of lockdown
4.1. Psychological effects
It is observed that there is a confusion with the rapid spread of the
COVID-19 outbreak in the world and the emergence of serious consequences. For this reason, it is certain that the new data for COVID-19
mental health effects will be obtained more clearly with the big data to
be obtained. According to the first findings obtained in the studies,
Lockdown has been shown to be related to human psychology. It was
determined that stress (8.0%) and depression (16.0–28.0%) were psychological reactions during the COVID-19 pandemic. These findings
have some limitations. These psychological symptoms emerged from
only a few of the affected countries and may not reflect the experiences
of people living in other parts of the world. As a result, it is clear that
having confirmed cases and mortality rates due to the COVID-19 pandemic has an impact on mental health problems.
4.2. Environmental effects
The effect of the lockdown on the environment due to Covid-19 has
been addressed in many studies. It is observed that the environment has
started to renew itself due to all kinds of industry, vehicle movement
and social activities of people continue at a low level for a long time. In
particular, a positive effect of lockdown restrictions on air and water
quality has been observed. Yunus et al. have quantitatively determined
that the quality of the water of Venbanad Lake has increased approximately 15.6% in India with the remote sensing imaging method [12].
Kerimray et al. have analyzed the effect of the 27-day lockdown in the
city of Almaty, Kazakhstan on the concentrations of air pollutants, and
emphasized the increase of air quality in Almaty [13]. Another study
has showed that the quality of air due to the lockdown in Delhi has a
positive effect [14]. Dantas et al. have calculated the CO emission level
as approximately 30.3–48.5% due to the lockdown in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil [15]. For this study, we emphasized that the effect of lockdown
Fig. 4. Tukey-lambda normality plot.
Table 2
Tukey lambda-correlation.
Distribution Lambda (λ) Correlation (r)
Approx. Cauchy −1.00 0.6557
Exact Logistic 0.00 0.7333
Approx. Normal 0.14 0.7402
U-Shaped 0.50 0.6968
Exactly Uniform 1.00 0.6697
Table 3
Validation of statistical analysis.
Source Std
Error
Sum of Squares t-Ratio F-Ratio Prob > F
Prob > |t|
Model 15944.03 19001496 −0.83 5.7639 0.0413
Lockdown Days 452.1786 6933250 2.40 6.1614 0.0203
A. Atalan Annals of Medicine and Surgery 56 (2020) 38–42
41on covid-19 was statistically significant. Examples of the environmental
impacts of the indirect lockdown due to Covid-19 were provided.
4.3. Economic effects
The COVID-19 outbreak, which is now turning into a pandemic, is a
global health crisis. However, the measures taken by countries against
this epidemic bring along an unprecedented economic disaster [16].
The global pandemic, namely COVID-19, has been dealt with in many
studies on the socio-economic effects of the world economy [17]. In
almost 90% of the world, social isolation is applied in some way, people
do not go out on the streets, workplaces are closed, flights are banned,
people are dismissed. In terms of the extent of destruction in the
economy during the pandemic and the speed of the expected recovery
after the pandemic; at what level and when the outbreak will be
brought under control, how long the current social distance/isolationoriented measures will be loosened and when it will begin to normalize
in the expansionary economic measures already taken.
5. The limitations of the study
There are some limitations of this study to measure the effect of
Lockdown on COVID-19 cases. The COVID-19 pandemic is still ongoing
so statistical analysis should continue. There are conflicting statements
regarding lockdown by countries on COVID-19. In countries where the
COVID-19 case is intensely occurring, either no lockdown is imposed or
is applied intermittently. In addition, it is claimed that, besides the
positive aspects of the lockdown, people who comply with this restriction cause a weakened immune system. The main reason for this is
that there is too much food consumption and limited mobility. The
effect of the lockdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic on human
health may be the subject of future work.
6. Conclusion
COVID-19's daily increasing cases and deaths have led to worldwide
lockdown, quarantine and some restrictions. This study aims to analyze
the effect of lockdown days on the spread of coronavirus in 49 countries. This study offers initial evidence that the COVID-19 pandemic can
be suppressed by a lockdown. In addition, other parameters such as
demographic of population, density of populations, the parameters of
weather, economy, infrastructure of healthcare systems may be considered in the studies considering that it may be effective on COVID-19
pandemic. As a result, the application of lockdown by governments is
also thought to be effective on psychology, environment and economy
with it being effective on COVID-19.
Ethical approval
Not applicable.
Sources of funding
None.





NEW PAPER



Special Section Paper
COVID-19 in context: Why do people die in
emergencies? It’s probably not because of
collective psychology
John Drury1
* , Stephen Reicher2 and Clifford Stott3
1
University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
2
University of St Andrews, UK
3
Keele University, UK
Notions of psychological frailty have been at the forefront of debates around the public
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, there is the argument that collective
selfishness, thoughtless behaviour, and over-reaction would make the effects of COVID19 much worse. The same kinds of claims have been made in relation to other kinds of
emergencies, such as fires, earthquakes, and sinking ships. We argue that in these cases as
well as in the case of the COVID-19 pandemic, other factors are better explanations for
fatalities – namely under-reaction to threat, systemic or structural factors, and
mismanagement. Psychologizing disasters serves to distract from the real causes and
thus from who might be held responsible. Far from being the problem, collective
behaviour in emergencies – including the solidarity and cooperation so commonly
witnessed among survivors – is the solution, one that should be harnessed more
effectively in policy and practice.
Notions of psychological frailty – weaknesses of reason or weaknesses of morality – have
been evident in many of the comments on public responses to the COVID-19 crisis. Some
of these have informed policy. For example, part of the reason for delay in introducing
stricter distancing measures in the United Kingdom was the authorities’ assumption that
the public would soon ‘fatigue’ and stop observing them.1 As ever, though, such frailty is
said to be magnified by the collective. Thus, back in the early days of COVID-19, many
commentators argued that collective ‘panic’ would potentially be more disastrous than
the pandemic itself, through its effects on markets, availability of goods,2 relations
between different groups,3 and crime.4 ‘Panic’ – meaning selfish, thoughtless behaviour,
and over-reaction – was said to be as ‘contagious’ as the virus itself.5 Such collective
psychology would therefore turn an emergency into a disaster
But is this really the case? Exactly the same claim about the role of public ‘panic’ has
historically been made in relation to many other kinds of emergencies, including fires,
terrorist attacks, sinking ships, and crowd crushes. Was it really selfishness, over-reaction,
and general bad behaviour that caused so many deaths in these cases? Or was it something
else?
Take the sinking of the M/V Estonia in 1994, for example. Over 800 people died. Prima
facie, the greater survival rates of men over women and crew over passengers might
suggest that the strongest individuals selfishly neglected others in order to save
themselves. But analysis of the survivorship records and eyewitness testimonies illustrates
the danger of psychologizing physical constraints (Cornwell et al., 2001). The extreme
listing of the ship was very sudden. There were attempts among passengers to help each
other, but most did not have the strength to get to the exits themselves, let alone assist
others.
Examining the evidence in emergencies suggests three main reasons why there are
avoidable fatalities: (1) under-reaction to threat, (2) systemic factors, and (3) mismanagement. Here, we briefly describe these alternative explanations for deaths in disasters. We
then examine how far they help us understand what has happened in the case of COVID19 in the UK context, before discussing the real collective psychology of emergencies.
Why did they die?
Rather than over-reaction, the first factor that turns an emergency into a disaster is underreaction. People often underestimate risk and disregard possible signals of danger
(Tierney, Lindell, & Perry, 2001). During 9/11, people inside the World Trade Center who
saw objects falling from the sky outside did not initially recognize these as pieces of the
plane that had struck their building. Slowness to comprehend the threat means delay in
attempts to escape. Some people even took time to close down their computers before
they sought to leave the building.
The second reason for deaths in emergencies is systemic. Disasters do not affect
everyone in the same way; those already disadvantaged suffer disproportionately.6 In the
Grenfell Tower fire – the worst fire in the United Kingdom since the second world war –
neglect and cost-saving by the authorities and manufacturers were behind the fatal
decision to clad the block in flammable material. Poorer sections of society also have fewer
resources to help them cope when disaster strikes and less power to demand adequate
aftercare.
A third reason why emergencies often end so badly is mismanagement. The Cocoanut
Grove nightclub fire of 1942, in which 492 people died, has been presented in psychology
textbooks as an embodiment of the received wisdom that ‘most deaths in night-club fires
are due to crowd panic’. Chertkoff and Kushigian’s (1999) detailed re-analysis of events
suggests instead failure of management of two types. First, there was mismanagement of
space. The emergency exit door was locked. The windows were also nailed shut to
prevent people leaving without paying their tab. Second, there were failures of
communication. There were no exit signs or training in emergency evacuation, so when
staff tried to help lead survivors out, they could not find the fire exit. In the official
investigation, the major causes of the loss of life were said to be the locked doors, the
unfamiliarity and inaccessibility of normal exits, and the jamming of the revolving door
There was no implication that crowd behaviour caused the deaths. The management was
subsequently prosecuted for manslaughter and neglect of building laws.
A similar story of mismanagement of space can be found in the literature on fatal crowd
crushes (sometimes – usually erroneously – called ‘stampedes’). ‘Panic’ explanations
once dominated, but a recent systematic review cites as the most common causes of
fatalities not collective psychology but overcrowding, closure of exits, congestion at
bottlenecks, deficiencies in safety barriers, and lack of coordination with local authorities
(de Almeida & von Schreeb, 2019). Notoriously, the fatal crush at Hillsborough in 1989
was initially explained by some in terms of the disorderly behaviour of fans. But it was later
demonstrated that disproportionate concern among authorities with preventing football
hooliganism led to neglect of crowd safety – including the disastrous decision to let fans
into an already overcrowded terrace.7 In short, Hillsborough, like Cocoanut Grove, did
not happen because of failings at the level of collective psychology.
In relation to failures of communication, changes to information and communication
practices have often improved safety and saved lives. When the World Trade Center was
subject to a terrorist attack in 1993, the evacuation was relatively slow (Aguirre, Wenger,
& Vigo, 1998). Subsequently, regular drills were introduced so that people became
familiar with the locations of emergency exits. This measure helped make the 9/11
evacuation so successful.8 In the case of mass casualty decontamination following a
chemical incident, failure of responders to communicate effectively has led to reduced
public compliance with the procedure, increasing risk of fatalities (Carter et al., 2015).
The solution has been to train responders with the skills to communicate to the public
both why decontamination is needed and how to carry it out (Drury et al., 2019).
Under-reaction, system, and mismanagement in the COVID-19 response
in the United Kingdom
Unlike fires, earthquakes, floods, and bombings, which tend to be short-term events
which occur in one place, the effects of the current pandemic are dispersed in time and
space. Yet like these other emergencies, there is a mortal threat which creates collective
fear. And when we examine some of the major problems in response and outcomes9 in the
COVID-19 crisis, prima facie our three-fold classification above fits better than
explanations in terms of public selfishness, thoughtlessness, and over-reaction.
First, under-reaction:While some members of the public have not taken the pandemic
seriously, the UK data show that the vast majority adhered to the social distancing and ‘stay
at home’ regulations.10 Yet there is evidence of highly consequential political underreaction. In the United Kingdom, a criticism has been that that the government did not
prepare or respond in time.11 Importantly, the official advice on social distancing was only
given on 16 March 2020, and the instruction to ‘stay at home’ only on the 23rd. The result
of this under-reaction is a death rate proportionately higher than most other countries 
with over 30,000 hospital and community deaths recorded by 12 May 2020 (Scally,
Jacobson, & Abbasi, 2020).
Some of this failure to prepare in time may be straightforward mismanagement. But
some of it may also be due to under-estimating risk by those in authority. The World Health
Organization warned about the risk of human-to-human transmission of COVID-19 as early
as 10 January 2020 and urged precautions. The first Department of Health and Social Care
press release on COVID-19, on 22 January, stated that the risk to the UK population was
‘low’.12 Two days later, the Lancet published the first article showing evidence that
COVID-19 was transmittable to humans; the authors recommended careful surveillance,
rigorous testing, respirators, and greater use of personal protective equipment.13 But on
the same day, the UK Chief Medical Officer still maintained that the risk to the UK public
was low. The first documented transmission within the United Kingdom (as opposed to
from travellers from abroad) appeared on 28 February. Yet the UK risk level was not raised
to ‘high’ till 12 March.
In relation to our second factor, one example where systemic factors were evident but
a discourse of public bad behaviour was mobilized was in the case of so-called ‘panic
buying’.14 The rapid emptying of supermarket shelves was an effect of the vulnerability of
just-in-time supply chains to just a small uptick in consumer spending; and purchasing
evidence suggests that, in fact, only a small proportion of the population was stockpiling
in response to the expectations of ‘lockdown’ and shortages.15 Nevertheless, government
ministers chided some of the public for their ‘selfishness’, psychologizing the problem.
This representation of the public as selfish is highly consequential. Where others in the
community are seen as competitors, this can create the very individualism that is being
condemned, undermining the sense of collectivity needed in these times (van Bavel et al.,
2020).
Systemic factors have been crucial in another sense. Poorer and less powerful sections
of society had fewer choices about how to behave during the first phase of lockdown.
Despite media campaigns to vilify some people as selfish and thoughtless ‘covidiots’, the
evidence on reasons for non-adherence shows that much of it was practical rather than
psychological. Many people had to cram into Tube trains to go to work because they
needed money to survive and government support schemes were insufficient. People
were told they could go out to exercise, but those in urban areas had limited public space.
And some employers failed to provide the support for social distancing and hygiene.16
Those with less income and wealth also live in more crowded homes.17
The outcomes of these systematic inequalities are predictable: Poorer people have
repeatedly been shown to be more vulnerable to infection and more likely to die.18 These
inequalities have persisted into the second phase of lockdown (from May 2020), with
lower income people being less able to work from home and more likely to be in jobs that
bring them into contact with others
Finally, there is evidence of a specific mismanagement in the form of failure of
communication. In the UK response, one thing we observed to have changed (and which
might therefore indicate recognition of an earlier error) was the way the public were
addressed in the official messaging. Initial government communications stressed the risk
to oneself as an individual. For example:
As per the current advice, the most important thing individuals can do to protect themselves
remains washing their hands more often, for at least 20 seconds, with soap and water.19
(emphasis added)
The message some people therefore picked up from this was about the risk to
themselves personally. Such individual-focused messaging can lead people to discount the
risk, especially if they consider themselves young and healthy.20 Later, there was a shift to
the rationale being to ‘protect the NHS’, ‘protect others’, and a change from ‘you the
potential victim’ to ‘you the spreader’ (e.g., ‘act like you’ve got it’), which seems to have
been more persuasive.21
The role of collective psychology
This last example makes the point that indeed psychology is heavily involved in the public
response to COVID-19. However, it is not a psychology of fixed behavioural tendencies,
since the self and hence ‘self-interest’ (the motivations for and boundaries of concern)
varies with contextual factors (in this case political leadership, which failed initially to
communicate in collectivist terms). So, of course psychology matters in what happens in
emergencies, but for reasons other than inevitable collective selfishness, thoughtlessness,
and over-reaction.
Let’s consider first the conditions under which behaviour is competitive vs
cooperative in emergencies. There have been many reports of mutual social support by
members of the public during the COVID-19 crisis.22 Reviews suggest that cooperation
among survivors is very common in emergencies and that members of the public save
more lives than professional responders (Drury et al., 2019). But, in some emergencies,
people compete, push, and even trample each other. What are the conditions for this to
occur? Chertkoff and Kushigian’s (1999) comparison of different evacuations found that
there was more competition when exits were narrow and unfamiliar. We also know that
people compete more and coordinate less in evacuations when they are positioned
psychologically as individuals rather than as group members. As Mintz (1951) shows,
when an evacuating crowd blocks the exit, this can be explained in terms of the
prevalence of individual competition in a collective setting (rather than in terms of
excessive emotion). In these cases, then, the emergency ends badly due to the absence of
collective psychology (i.e., lack of coordination and cooperation).

Cooperating and giving support can also carry risks, which need to be acknowledged.
In mass evacuations, the larger the group, the slower the egress, because speed is reduced
through people interacting with each other (Aguirre et al., 1998). And the motivation to
give support to other survivors can lead some to take risks with their personal safety; so,
what is good for the collective in emergency is not always good for particular individuals
(Drury, Cocking, & Reicher, 2009).23 In the case of COVID-19, the risk to the individual
from supporting the group is clear where that supportive behaviour involves physical
proximity (whether delivering food or giving emotional support face-to-face).
What about public under-reaction – why does this occur? Under-estimation of risk has
sometimes been characterized as an ‘optimistic bias’ (Kinsey, Gwynne, Kuligowski, &
Kinateder, 2019). But in a context where emergency events are rare (i.e., most of the
time), it is reasonable to assume that ‘it won’t happen to us’. This assumption can reverse
when emergency events become more common – for example, in 2017 after a spate of
terrorist attacks in London, hundreds of people in Oxford Street fled from a noise that
turned out to be harmless. In general, then, the extent to which information concerning a
threat is seen as plausible is a function of the broad social context of dangers. Expectations
of danger are raised (and the readiness to flee or take other action is greater) in a context of
recent incidents relevant to our social group.
How do perceptions of risk become collective? People respond not only to ‘direct’
signals of risk but to other people’s responses to that signal (Bruder, Fischer, & Manstead,
2014). We suggest that the extent to which the response of others to the possible threat is
seen as conveying information is dependent on the self-relevance of these others in a
particular context, which in turn is often a function of shared identity. Based on what we
know about social influence processes in other contexts (Bruder et al., 2014), in the case
of COVID-19, it is plausible to suppose that the sight of others in our community routinely
observing (or ignoring) social distancing regulations, for example, is likely to send a strong
signal to us around the safety of doing the same – particularly where we identify with the
community or see these exemplars as prototypes.
Psychological factors can interact with management failures to help explain why some
emergency events end so badly. Fearing public ‘panic’ leads the authorities to withhold
information about the emergency (Drury et al., 2019). But lack of information in an
emergency increases public anxiety. And when the public perceives that information is
being withheld from them, this damages their relationship with the authority (Carter
et al., 2015). Consequently, when the authorities do release correct information, the
public may mistrust and fail to act upon it. In the case of COVID-19, the need to treat the
public with respect in order to build trust has been part of the advice given by behavioural
scientists to the UK government.24
Discussion and conclusions
We do not deny that in emergencies some people behave selfishly and thoughtlessly or
that some may over-react. Indeed, as explained, research suggests some of the conditions
for competition to prevail over cooperation. What we are questioning here is the notion
that such public reactions are a default or are a major cause of problems in the COVID-19
crisis. The existing literature on disasters does not support this view, and prima facie
major problems in the COVID-19 response and outcomes can be better understood
otherwise – in terms of (political) under-reaction, systemic issues, and mismanagement.
Collective ‘panic’ is referred to as a ‘disaster myth’ in the literature on disasters (Drury
et al., 2019). Rather than a neutral description of how people actually behave, it is best
understood as part of a particular discourse or cultural representation, one which
psychologizes – and indeed pathologizes – public responses in emergencies and disasters.
Given what is known about under-reaction, systemic factors, and mismanagement in
emergencies, to emphasize instead the role of collective ‘bad behaviour’ has clear
ideological functions. In naturalizing fatalities, it distracts from the real causes and thus
from who might be held responsible for mismanagement, instead blaming the victims.
The irony, of course, is that, far from being the problem, collective psychology in
emergencies – the solidarity and cooperation so commonly witnessed among community
members and strangers – is usually the solution. Collective psychology therefore can and
should be harnessed more effectively in policy and practice in the COVID-19 response
(Elcheroth & Drury, 2020) – through framing both the threat and the solution in collective
terms, and through emphasizing shared norms around collective well-being and safety
(Drury et al., 2019). Why do people die in emergencies? It is probably not because of
collective psychology



NEW PAPER




Psychology and COVID-19: impacts, 
themes and way forward
Anthony L Pillay1,2 and Brendon R Barnes3
Abstract
COVID-19 has brought a new set of challenges at a time when poorer nations were struggling 
with existing burdens. However, the lockdown restrictions aimed at slowing the infection rate 
has created problems of their own such as increased unemployment, poverty, and mental health 
problems. While the lockdown approach may be effective for public health, there is concern 
about the way it is formulated, the empirical basis of some restrictions, and societal impacts. 
There is additional concern that COVID-19 and associated restrictions disproportionately affect 
marginalised groups. As a discipline primarily concerned with human behaviour, Psychology has 
much to contribute to addressing the pandemic.
Keywords
COVID-19, mental health, poverty, psychology, race, women
A host of new words emerged in 2020, some that we never previously contemplated and others that 
we knew, but hardly thought we would need in our lifetime. Terms and phrases such as lockdown, 
self-isolation, social distancing, flatten the curve, herd immunity, and new-normal are used daily, 
and some are recent inclusions in the Oxford English Dictionary (2020). We have conversations 
that include abbreviations like PPE (personal protective equipment), WFH (working from home) 
and SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2). Of course, we are referring 
to the COVID-19 pandemic that has caused untold havoc and forced us to develop our knowledge 
of the disease, regardless of our profession or occupation. Knowledge about the virus quickly 
became essential for health professionals and the public. Because treatment was not an option at 
the time of writing, prevention became the order of the day, with the main approach being a host of 
behaviour change strategies.
Coincidentally, it is one century ago that the world began picking up the pieces after the Spanish 
flu, caused by an H1N1 virus, which infected about 500 million and killed in excess of 50 million 

across the globe (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019). About one-third of the world’s 
population was infected between 1918 and 1919, and that was in an era when transnational and 
transcontinental travel was relatively infrequent. Other pandemics of the 20th century include the 
Asian flu in 1957 that killed an estimated 2 million people worldwide, and the Hong Kong flu that 
killed about 1 million people after it took hold in 1968 (Mackenzie, 2005).
COVID-19 has had a profound effect on our thoughts, emotions, and behaviour. Understandably, 
it has generated much fear and panic globally. Mental health correlates to the pandemic have been 
widespread and varied in presentation, related to vulnerability and premorbid functioning, with 
social and economic factors contributing heavily. Commenting on national survey data during 
COVID-19, the United Nations (2020) raised concern after studies showed distress prevalence 
ranging from 35% to 60%. A recent population-based survey found that 54% of South Africans 
viewed themselves as moderate to high risk for contracting the virus, suggesting some level of 
anxiety about their current situation (Human Sciences Research Council, 2020). Another community survey of over 12,000 respondents noted significant negative emotions including 33% of 
adults depressed and 45% fearful, with fear, stress, and depression more prevalent in those under 
40 years of age than older persons (Orkin et al., 2020). More worrying, however, is that the 
increased mental health service needs are surfacing during a time of reduced mental health service 
provision due to the risks associated with in-person consultations. In attempts to limit the spread of 
infection, large numbers of mental health service providers have opted to offer telehealth and virtual consultations. The extent to which this mode of consultation is meeting the needs of all concerned in the current situation is yet to be determined, considering the diversity of those in need, 
especially in terms of age, educational level, technological sophistication, financial resources and 
numerous other variables – all an indication of just how egalitarian the virus is.
The mental health problems evident globally, however, are not all due directly to COVID-19. In 
some cases there is severe anxiety about being infected, obsession with prevention behaviours, and 
possible neuropsychiatric sequelae to the infection itself (Troyer et al., 2020). On the other hand, 
many of the mental health effects can be considered iatrogenic, being caused by interventions 
aimed at curbing a health problem. The lockdown, which was instituted in many countries to delay 
transmission in order to avoid overwhelming the health care system, has been imposed strictly in 
countries that opted for such an approach. All citizens were restricted to their homes, with educational facilities and all sectors of employment closed, except for essential services. The ‘stay home’ 
and ‘social distancing’ orders may have been tolerated initially but, having continued for several 
weeks and even months, it has had psychological effects to varying degrees with increased prevalence of depressive and anxiety symptoms (United Nations, 2020). A recent review in the Lancet
on the psychological effects of quarantine noted symptoms of post-traumatic stress, anger, confusion, with some studies linking longer quarantine duration with greater distress, while food and 
water shortages were frequent stressors during quarantine (Brooks et al., 2020). It has been suggested that in instituting the COVID-19 lockdown on much of the global community ‘we are conducting arguably the largest psychological experiment ever’, that while authorities are setting up 
field hospitals to treat the disease there is a concomitant failure to set up the psychological care 
resources that will be needed, and that we will pay the price later (Van Hoof, 2020).
Included here are the major psychological and social consequences of loss of employment and 
the broader economic crisis caused by the lockdown. As history has shown, alcohol and other substances are often used as a way of coping in times of distress. However, the ban on the sale of 
alcohol and tobacco products in South Africa has created much anger and frustration, with looting 
of liquor stores and also legal action threats by liquor sales groups arguing that the ban is unreasonable and unconstitutional (Mlamla, 2020). There were also frustrating restrictions that seem to 
have very little to do with prevention (e.g., not being allowed to buy open toed shoes or a short 150 South African Journal of Psychology 50(2)
sleeved top unless of a knitted fabric) and in some, instances, may work against prevention, for 
example, crowding during restricted exercise times allocated for public spaces.
An extended lockdown, as has been the case in many countries, has also led to distrust about its 
effectiveness. Critics have argued that lockdowns will not achieve the desired impact on infections 
in high-density areas because the interventions are simply not possible. This is especially true for 
poorer countries and those on the South American, African, and Asian continents. For example, 
how do people practice social distancing in crowded living conditions? How do people practice 
handwashing with limited water? This, together with the extreme force by law enforcement officials mostly directed at the poor and marginalised, has led many to question the overreach of government actions that impede human rights. Governments need to pay particular attention to the 
precarious balance between instituting restrictions that are necessary and which will achieve the 
goal of reducing the infection rate, while not treading on the basic rights of its citizens.
Interestingly, researchers from the Oxford Group found that, relative to the severity of outbreak, 
poorer nations imposed more severe lockdown measures than wealthy nations (Gibney, 2020). 
Perhaps an unexpected finding, but whether this approach is advantageous is yet to be determined. 
The phenomenon could reflect on the health resource inadequacies in poorer countries and a resultant panic about whether they will cope with a pandemic, hence their haste towards a cautious 
approach. Adopting an early, robust planning strategy is not to be derided. However, in the face of 
some of the restrictive measures that appear so arbitrary, one cannot but question their validity and 
scientific basis. It leads inevitably to concerns about the extent of social control that governments 
have been known to use in other contexts, like curbing dissenting political views (Wheat, 2019) 
and restricting freedom of speech. Such overreach is destined to evoke severe reactions and serves 
to alienate the populace from its leaders at a time when a unified stance is essential.
What can a critical, responsive, and socially engaged psychology 
offer?
South African psychologists and allies from other disciplines have been active in important ways. 
They have quickly adapted to teaching and practicing psychology virtually. Professional societies 
have lobbied medical aids to support online consultations and teletherapy. They have alerted the 
authorities to the immense mental health burden of lockdown on individuals and on stretched public health practitioners. Some psychologists have been active in the media, conveying valuable 
messaging and information to help the public cope with the stresses of the lockdown and anxieties 
related to the disease. They have enhanced help facilities for people struggling with mental health 
issues and gender-based violence. Psychologists have highlighted how behavioural sciences can 
help frame public health interventions (Tomlinson & Young, 2020). Many have been actively 
involved in local and international research projects to understand the psychological impacts and 
determinants of health-related behaviour. These efforts should be commended.
Importantly, scholars have pointed out the uneven impacts (both of the disease and lockdown) 
of COVID-19 on the marginalised, for example, unemployed or low-income earners, women, 
migrants, disabled communities, LGBTI (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex) communities, and those in abusive relationships. COVID-19, like previous crises, has highlighted longstanding social fractures such as poverty, inequality, xenophobia, racism, patriarchy, ableism, and 
unequal health care access. For example, of concern has been the significant racial disparity in the 
way the virus has affected communities. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020) 
noted that the disproportionate over-representation of African, Hispanic, and Latino Americans 
among those becoming severely ill and dying relates to a number of factors that make them more 
vulnerable, including living conditions, work circumstances, underlying or comorbid health Pillay and Barnes 151
problems, and inadequate health service access. In South Africa, race and class have historically 
been associated with food insecurities, inadequate housing and poor health care access, among 
other disparities. However, even in the post-apartheid era, factors such as race and socioeconomic 
status dictate health access, with Black Africans, the poor and rural communities having most difficulty (Harris et al., 2011). With South Africa being one of the world’s most unequal societies, a 
large portion of its people are extremely poor, dependent on social grants and informal sector 
employment, and the lockdown effects have been overwhelming (Orkin et al., 2020).
The impact on women, particularly poor women, cannot be ignored. The impact of unemployment on poor Black women (already the highest unemployed) is likely to be severe. Women, across 
class strata, experience increased domestic and child care burdens as well as increases in domestic 
violence. Reports of gender-based violence and domestic abuse to the police in the first 2months 
since the lockdown began numbered 1426 in the Gauteng province of South Africa, meaning the 
actual prevalence is much higher given that many women do not report violence and abuse (Seleka, 
2020). As a result of increased domestic and other demands, employed women have also reported 
lower productivity compared to men during lockdown. For example, publication productivity has 
been significantly lower for women academics compared with men (Fazarkerley, 2020). The added 
pressures that accompany the lockdown restrictions have been significant, with schools closed, but 
also child-minders and domestic helpers have been prohibited from working. The latter scenario 
plays out a further economic disaster because domestic workers in South Africa are mainly poor 
women who rely heavily on this source of income. Private households have been known to provide 
around 1.3 million such jobs (Statistics South Africa, 2018), and by the time of this publication, the 
majority have been without work for over 2months. The recent survey by Orkin et al. (2020) noted 
significant mental health impact on women during this period, with feelings of depression and 
apprehension reported by 36% and 50%, respectively. That study also highlighted hunger as the 
most significant predictor of overall psychological distress, revealing that those who are hungry 
experience 9% more sadness, 12% more anger, 15% more stress, and 17% more depression than 
those who are not hungry.
Lockdown has also had severe impacts on LGBTI people. There have been reports of increased 
stigmatisation, discrimination, and violence against this group (Office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Human Rights, 2020). In Peru, for example, the government has allowed men 
and women out on alternative days with no accommodation for transgender people leading to stigmatisation (Perez-Brumer & Silva-Santisteban, 2020). Similarly, the lockdown has had profound 
impacts on migrants who are in precarious positions due to unstable work, xenophobic attitudes, 
lack of access to services (e.g., health care), susceptibility to unscrupulous law enforcement practices, and mobility restrictions. The mental and physical impacts on people with disabilities are 
particularly acute and are deserving of attention (McKinney et al., 2020).
In addition, scholars have long cautioned us about the political consequences of health behaviour change (Barnes, 2015). Health behaviour change tends to place the blame and remedy for 
COVID-19 on the marginalised. Becket (2020) writes about how in the United States, the COVID19 discourse has shifted the blame on the unhealthy lifestyles of the marginalised. The argument 
put forward by the US health secretary was that the reason for the high morbidity and mortality was 
because of unhealthy lifestyles and comorbidity such as diabetes among African Americans. Not 
only does this have racist and classist undertones, it ignores structural determinants of COVID-19 
such as poverty, inequality, environmental injustices, poor leadership (in that country in particular), 
and poor health care that governments have failed to address.
It is important for psychologists to continue the important work related to COVID-19 in terms 
of research, teaching, and practice. It is important for organised psychology to continue to draw 
attention to inadequately resourced mental health care systems and to strengthen partnerships 152 South African Journal of Psychology 50(2)
with other sectors, disciplinary allies, and activist organisations. It is important to speak out 
against human rights violations that have been reported in several parts of the world. It is equally 
important to highlight upstream issues that governments around the world, but ours specifically, 
have failed to address. COVID-19, like previous social crises, offers another opportunity for 
psychologists to actively speak up for marginalised groupings in pursuit of a more just and equal 
society.
Psychology, as a behavioural and human science, has much to contribute in shaping and 
reinforcing behavioural interventions and public health strategies in times of pandemics like 
COVID-19. In addition, it is well placed to advise on necessary social policy development especially considering that societal support is essential for governments to effectively manage a 
pandemic. To this end, the South African Journal of Psychology together with the Psychological 
Society of South Africa (PsySSA) and partner publishing outlets, will do everything it can to 
be an avenue for psychological contributions on COVID-19. As a discipline, Psychology has 
witnessed many global challenges including wars, famine, economic crises, fascism, racism, 
and disease – it is vital that we consider carefully what we learn from this pandemic; how the 
world responded; what our failings were; and how we all can think and behave differently in a 
post-COVID-19 world.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.



NEW PAPER



fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 1
CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS
published: 05 November 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.590594
Edited by:
Joanna Sokolowska,
University of Social Sciences
and Humanities, Poland
Reviewed by:
Nigel Harvey,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Barbara Summers,
Leeds University Business School,
United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Hersh Shefrin
hshefrin@scu.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Cognition,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 02 August 2020
Accepted: 07 October 2020
Published: 05 November 2020
Citation:
Shefrin H (2020) The Psychology
Underlying Biased Forecasts
of COVID-19 Cases and Deaths
in the United States.
Front. Psychol. 11:590594.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.590594
The Psychology Underlying Biased
Forecasts of COVID-19 Cases and
Deaths in the United States
Hersh Shefrin*
Department of Finance, Leavey School of Business, Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, CA, United States
This paper discusses the impact of a series of psychological phenomena on the
U.S. response to COVID-19, focusing on forecasts of cases and deaths. The
specific phenomena comprise unrealistic optimism bias, overconfidence, anchoring and
adjustment, representativeness, motivated reasoning, and groupthink.
Keywords: biases, forecasts, deaths, cases, pandemic (COVID-19)
INTRODUCTION
A combination of psychological issues have negatively impacted the manner in which the
United States has responded to the COVID-19 pandemic, especially judgments of future
cases and deaths.
In mid-September 2020, the number of confirmed cases and the number deaths from COVID19 in the United States (U.S.) was the second highest in the world. Confirmed cases exceeded 6
million and total deaths exceeded 200,000. On a per capita basis, the U.S ranked second at 19,958
confirmed cases per million and 592 deaths per million, just behind Brazil. By way of contrast,
China, the country in which the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) originated, has experienced just
over 90,000 confirmed cases and more than 4,700 deaths, corresponding, respectively, to 62.7 and
3.3 per million.
The situation in the United States is even starker when contrasted with countries
such as South Korea [approximately 22,500 confirmed cases (439 per million) and 367
deaths (7 per million)] and Taiwan [500 confirmed cases (21 per million) and 21 deaths
(0.294 per million)] which to date rank near the top in best managing the outbreak
of the pandemic.
The reasons why confirmed cases and deaths from COVID-19 are so high in the United States
are varied and complex. I find it useful to place countries into one of the following four categories:
1. Those that responded aggressively when the virus first presented within their borders,
using testing, tracing, social distancing, hygiene, masks, restrictions on mass gatherings, and
lockdowns1
;
2. Those whose first responses were weak, experienced serious outbreaks, and revised their
responses along the lines followed by countries who had initially reacted strongly2
;
1
South Korea and Taiwan fall into the first category. Subsequent infection waves have occurred even among countries falling
into the first category.
2
See Stancati and Pancevski (2020). Italy is an example of a country falling into the second category. Other countries that
so qualify are China, Germany, Spain, and France.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 590594fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 2
Shefrin Biased U.S. COVID-19 Forecasts
3. Those whose first responses were weak, experienced
serious outbreaks, and delayed revising their responses
along the lines followed by countries who initially reacted
strongly, thereby losing control as the virus continued to
spread within their borders3
; and
4. Those who have not yet experienced serious outbreaks4
.
I suggest that the United States falls into the third category.
There are many reasons for the country’s weak response
that involve differences in ideology about individual liberties
and collective action, regulatory structures, the nature of its
public health system, supply chain issues, and flawed human
judgment5
. These are broad issues, and although I will touch
on some of these in the paper, I focus mostly on the flawed
human judgments made by a small group: the U.S. president,
key members of his coronavirus task force, and the Institute
for Heath Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) at the University
of Washington.
Forecasts by professionals can be important because of their
potential to inform the expectations of the public, and to
influence the decisions of policy makers. Moreover, there is
an important psychological dimension to the manner in which
people generally make predictions. In this paper, I discuss
one facet of how these issues have been manifest in the U.S.
response to COVID-19, by focusing on the presence of optimism
bias (Weinstein, 1980) and overconfidence (Svenson, 1981;
Harvey, 1997; Hoffrage, 2004) in forecasts of confirmed cases
and deaths associated with the pandemic. I also discuss the
impact of additional psychological phenomena that contribute
to optimism bias and overconfidence, namely motivated
reasoning (Kunda, 1990), representativeness (Kahneman and
Tversky, 1973), similarity (Tversky, 1977), anchoring and
adjustment (Tversky and Kahneman, 1974), and groupthink
(Janis, 1972, 1982).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
“Context: Forecasting U.S. COVID-19 Cases and Deaths”
describes the context for the development of projections of cases
and deaths from COVID-19 in the U.S. Section “Judgments,
Decisions, Biases, and Psychology” focuses on a series of
psychological issues that appear to have injected biases into these
projections. Section Conclusion concludes.
CONTEXT: FORECASTING U.S.
COVID-19 CASES AND DEATHS
On January 28, 2020, U.S. President Donald Trump received
a warning about COVID-19 from national security adviser
Robert O’Brien, who told him: “This will be the biggest national
security threat you face in your presidency. This is going
3The United Kingdom, Sweden, and Brazil fall into this category, and as I suggest
below, so does the United States.
4Up until the end of July, Botswana and Namibia fell into the fourth category. Since
then, confirmed cases and deaths have been increasing.
5During February 2020, the U.S. Center for Disease Control (CDC) experienced a
serious failure in creating a test for COVID-19, which contributed to a major delay
in the country’s ability to detect infection (Leonhardt, 2020; Lipton et al., 2020a).
to be the roughest thing you face” (Woodward, 2020). Just
over a week later, the president provided an implicit, private
conditional estimate of annual U.S. fatalities from COVID-19.
The estimate was a range, between 125,000 and 150,000 deaths,
conditional on China maintaining control of the virus within
its borders6
. As noted above, total fatalities crossed 200,000
in September 2020.
President Trump’s public pronouncements were diametrically
opposed to the views he shared privately with Woodward. In
mid-February, the number of coronavirus cases in the U.S. was
15, with all cases having a direct link to China, the source of
the outbreak. At that time, the President remarked: “The 15
within a couple of days is going to be down to close to zero”
(Watkins et al., 2020).
In the third week of February, the number of confirmed cases
began to jump in discrete amounts. U.S. equity market declined
sharply, as investors reduced their estimates downwards, of the
ability of the U.S. to prevent an outbreak in its homeland (Imbert
and Huang, 2020). At the end of February 2020, the number
of confirmed cases had risen to 66, with no deaths yet being
attributed to COVID-19.
During March 2020, some states within the U.S. began to
impose lockdowns and other containment measures to deal with
the outbreak of new cases. In consequence, unemployment rose
sharply, and both the U.S. Congress and Federal Reserve put
anti-cyclical policy measures in place to counteract the negative
shock to the economy. At the same time, the messaging from
the White House, which had established a coronavirus task
force, downplayed the severity of the threat, and emphasized
the importance of avoiding unnecessary containment measures
that would reduce economic activity. In the third week
of March, during a press briefing, the President suggested
that the economy might fully reopen by Easter, just a few
weeks away7
.
During March 2020, confirmed cases rose from 69 to 164,620.
Total U.S. deaths attributed to COVID-19 rose from 3 to 21,595.
In a press briefing on March 29, 2020 (Whitehouse. gov, 2020)
the President reversed his views about an Easter reopening, and
together with coronavirus task force leaders provided forecast
6
In a February 7 taped telephone conversation with Woodward, President Trump
said the following: “It’s also more deadly than your—you know, your, even your
strenuous flus. You know, people don’t realize, we lose 25,000, 30,000 people a
year here. Who would ever think that, right? Pretty amazing. And then I say, well,
is that the same thing? This is more deadly. This is 5 per—you know, this is 5 vs.
1% and <1%.” The 125,000–130,000 estimates are inferred from the figures given
in this quotation.
7This focus of this paper is on the narrow issue of forecasting bias, and not the
many broad issues relating to problematic judgments and decisions in the U.S.
response to the pandemic. Examples of broader issues include President Trump,
flanked by members of the coronavirus task force, trumpeting a report that lists the
U.S. as being number 1 in respect to the Global Health Security Index, but failing to
acknowledge that the report does so for emergency preparedness only, and points
out that the U.S. ranks poorly in respect to health care access; the White House in
2018 having disbanded its Pandemic Office, and therefore its readiness to deal with
a pandemic; the president firing a deputy inspector general at the Department of
Health and Human Services for identifying severe shortages at hospitals that were
treating COVID-19; the Center for Disease Control failing to produce a timely
test for COVID-19 early on during the pandemic; and the U.S. having a disjointed
public health system that was reliant on outdated technology, which limited its
ability to conduct testing and contact tracing.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 590594fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 3
Shefrin Biased U.S. COVID-19 Forecasts
ranges for eventual cumulative U.S. deaths from COVID-19. This
particular press briefing was important in three ways.
First, the briefing made clear that the White House accepted
that by not engaging in containment measures, total U.S. deaths
from COVID-19 would likely be near 2.2 million.
Second, the White House estimated that with containment,
total U.S. deaths would likely be between 100,000 and 200,0008
,
although several days later the high end was increased to 240,000
(Bierman and Levey, 2020).
Third, Dr. Deborah Birx, a leading member of the White
House task force addressing the pandemic, stated that her
team had reviewed the work of 12 institutes that had been
forecasting cases and deaths from COVID-19, and pointed people
to the IHME’s website, noting that the IHME estimates were in
line with their own.
In early April, Eichenbaum et al. (2020) presented a
framework that integrated standard models from epidemiology
and economics. The paper analyzed the interrelationship among
containment policy, economic activity, and the trajectory of
cumulative U.S. deaths from COVID-19. The authors examined
several cases, and examined a range of outcomes. Their analysis
suggested that cumulative U.S. deaths from COVID-19 would be
in the range 500,000 to 1.5 million, depending on the strength
of containment policy, that herd immunity would be between
50 and 70% of the population, that herd immunity would be
achieved between 36 and 52 weeks from the onset of the epidemic,
and that full containment of the virus would occur between 75
and 100 weeks after onset. Notably, a weak containment policy
would result in herd immunity being achieved more quickly, but
with more total cases and deaths9
.
For the U.S., April 2020 was an important month, and for
three reasons. First, confirmed cases and deaths associated with
COVID-19 soared and daily rates peaked. At the end of the
first week of the month, Dr. Anthony Fauci, arguably the most
respected member of the White House coronavirus task force,
remarked that the total number of deaths from COVID-19 might
not exceed 60,000 (Chappell, 2020)
10. Third, the White House
established its broad strategy for addressing the outbreak. This
strategy involved limiting the role of the federal government,
delegating responsibility to individual states, providing states
with some measure of resources, and working to encourage the
weakening of containment measures and consequent reopening
of the U.S. economy as quickly as possible. White House
8The transcript from the press briefing quotes Dr. Birx as saying the following:
“So in the model—and there’s a—there’s a large confidence interval, and so it’s
anywhere in the model between 80,000 and 160,000, maybe even potentially
200,000 people succumbing to this. That’s with mitigation. In that model, they
make full assumption that we continue doing exactly what we’re doing, but even
better, in every metro area with a level of intensity. Because we’re hoping that the
models are not completely right; that we can do better than what the predictions
are.”
9Value of life models, such as the one used in Eichenbaum et al. (2020) are
traditionally used by policy makers can be used to evaluate the tradeoff between
COVID-19 infections and deaths on the one hand, and economic activity on the
other. Notably, I can find no evidence to suggest that tradeoff frameworks such as
Eichenbaum et al. (2020) played any major role, or indeed any role at all, in White
House policy decisions related to COVID-19, meaning that policies appear to have
been developed based more on intuition than systematic analysis.
10Chappell (2020).
FIGURE 1 | Daily deaths per million from COVID-19 in the U.S. and in Italy
between January 1 and September 16, 2020. Source:
http://www.ourworldindata.org.
personnel working on the response to COVID-19 used the
term “state authority handoff ” to describe the first part of
the strategy11
.
Although the White House had established a coronavirus task
force, within the White House a small group of aides actually
separately developed policy for dealing with the virus. This group
was headed by the Chief of Staff12. Only one member of the group
was a public health official, and that was Dr. Birx, an expert
in infectious diseases, who had spoken alongside the president
at the March 29 press briefing. According to coverage in the
New York Times13, Dr. Birx “was a constant source of upbeat
news” and provided “charts emphasizing that outbreaks were
gradually easing.” One particular argument she advanced, in
April 2020, was that the U.S. “was likely to resemble Italy, where
virus cases declined steadily from frightening heights.”
Figure 1 contrasts the number of daily deaths per million
from COVID-19 in Italy and in the U.S. between January 1
and September 16, 2020. The left hand portion of Figure 1,
from January 1 through the end of April, provides the trajectory
relevant for Dr. Birx during March and April.
The perspective provided by Dr. Birx provided support
for two White House priorities, namely relaxing containment
measures and shifting responsibility for addressing the pandemic
to the states. With an upcoming Presidential election in
November 2020, the President appears to have been especially
concerned that strong containment measures would continue
to depress economic activity and therefore the likelihood of his
being re-elected.
At the March 29 press briefing, Dr. Birx made clear that the
IHME modeling approach, and estimates of cases and deaths,
were similar to her own. Subsequently, U.S. media focused
attention on the IHME. During April, IHME spokesperson Ali
Mokdad, Chief Strategy Officer and Professor of Global Health
11See Shear et al. (2020). In their article, the authors suggest that the state authority
handoff strategy would serve to shift blame from the president to the states, in the
event that U.S. cases and deaths from COVID-19 surged.
12The Chief of Staff at the time was Mark Meadows.
13See Shear et al. (2020).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 590594fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 4
Shefrin Biased U.S. COVID-19 Forecasts
at the University of Washington, participated in several media
interviews to discuss IHME’s projections (forecasts)14. On April
15, the IHME indicated that according to their model, the
number of new U.S. COVID-19 cases had peaked some days
before. At this time, the number of total confirmed cases reached
609,516 and the number of total deaths had reached 26,922.
On April 15, the IHME was projecting that the eventual
number of U.S. deaths attributable to COVID-19 would be
60,308. This projection was significantly below the low end of
the range provided by the White House, just 2 weeks before,
but in line with a statement made by Dr. Fauci a week before.
Both the IHME’s statements about the peak daily deaths having
been reached, and the lower estimate for total eventual deaths,
provided support for those who favored relaxing containment
measures and reopening the U.S. economy.
To provide a sense of the economic situation at the time,
on April 24, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) forecast
that during the second quarter of 2020 (April–June), U.S. gross
domestic product would shrink by approximately 11% from
the previous quarter (January–March), which corresponded to
an annual rate of 40%15. For most of April, the White House
had communicated its preference for reopening the economy
as soon as possible, and encouraged reopening measures to
take place on May 1.
On April 12, at the time of peak daily deaths, IHME Director
Dr. Christopher Murray publicly warned that reopening the
economy too soon would lead to higher daily deaths16. In an
interview with the New York Times, Dr. Murray noted that on or
about April 22, he detected a change in tone in his conversations
with Dr. Birx, which reflected a serious interest in reopening
the economy imminently17. On May 4, when it became clear
that the reopening was indeed taking place, the IHME raised its
projection for cumulative deaths to 134,475, effectively doubling
its prior point forecast.
Infection rates strongly depend on social distancing behaviors.
According to coverage in the New York Times, the models
Dr. Birx employed in her analysis did not properly account
for the infection-related implications associated with reopening
the economy18. Between May 4 and June 19, new daily cases
ranged between 18,000 and 28,500, in a series of cycles with no
discernable trend. However, thereafter, daily cases began to rise
sharply. Writing for the Washington Post on June 25, Fritz and
14Two examples are a C-Span interview on April 15, https://www.c-span.org/
video/?471218-1/tracking-spread-covid-19, and a Fox News April 16 interview
on Fox News, https://www.foxnews.com/media/dr-ali-mokdad-ihme-revisedmodel.
15This forecast was in line with those made by private economists (Nicholson,
2020). Notably, the CBO also forecast that during the third quarter (July–
September), gross domestic product would grow at an annual rate of 23%, in the
fourth quarter (October–December) by 13%, and in 2021 (January–December) by
3%. In this regard, the CBO assumed that social distancing will be maintained but
at lower levels from those in March and April, through the first half of 2021. The
CBO’s forecasts for growth between July 2020 and December 2021 were higher
than those of academic economists, the latter having predicted a slower recovery
(Baker et al., 2020).
16CBS interview: https://www.axios.com/imhe-model-coronavirus-socialdistancing-93489e69-1e5c-439d-83a6-9d4456d0f52e.html
17See Shear et al. (2020).
18See Shear et al. (2020).
Selk (2020) report the highest single-day caseload, over 38,000,
for the United States, since the outbreak of the pandemic. Within
days, the number of new cases would cross 40,000 (per day)19
and during July would exceed 75,000. Fritz and Selk quote Robert
Redfield, Director of the Center for Disease Control (CDC) as
having said: “Our best estimate right now is that for every case
that’s reported, there actually are 10 other infections20.”
Fritz and Selk write that according to infectious-disease
experts, the increased number of cases reflects a rush to relax
containment measures without having put appropriate safety
measures in place, which they say “sends a dangerous and
inaccurate message”21
.
During the first week of July, Dr. Birx acknowledged that the
U.S. had underestimated community spread of the virus, noting
transmission by young people. A month later, she said that the
epidemic had entered a new phase, as it had moved into rural
areas from urban centers. She was very clear to say that the
situation in early August was distinctly different from what it had
been during the preceding March and April, in that it had become
“extraordinarily widespread22.”
During a public presentation in early August, Dr. Birx
responded to a question about whether the number of U.S.
COVID-19 related deaths would surpass 300,000 by the end
of 2020, a figure suggested by a former commissioner of the
Food and Drug Administration. Dr. Birx responded to the
question by saying “anything is possible,” and noted that such
an outcome would be far less likely if Americans practiced
appropriate social distancing and avoided mass gatherings
(Hawkins and Iati, 2020).
Dr. Fauci regularly emphasized the importance of wearing
masks, social distancing, choosing to be outdoors more than
indoors whenever possible, avoiding crowds and washing hands.
He repeated the point in an exchange with Senator Rand Paul,
during an August appearance at a Senate hearing on the nation’s
coronavirus response.
Whereas Dr. Fauci argued that these measures just mentioned
had helped New York’s recover from a major outbreak in April,
Senator Paul held that the recovery reflected herd immunity. Dr.
Fauci responded to the herd immunity assertion by stating that
22%, the COVID-19 infection rate in New York, was far too low
for herd immunity in the case of COVID-19. However, Senator
Paul’s perspective was that other forms of the coronavirus have
already provided immunity to the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2), perhaps half the population, in which case the combination
would be closer to 70%. By this argument, the U.S. had already
reached herd immunity in August, and the pandemic had already
begun to wind down in the U.S. (Cook, 2020).
Also in August, the president invited Dr. Scott Atlas into his
coronavirus task force and policy group. Dr. Atlas, a radiologist
19During March and April, the vast majority of COVID-19 cases and deaths were
concentrated in New York State and New Jersey. During the summer, cases and
deaths were concentrated in the south and west of the country.
20For sake of tractability, I do not address the undercount issue, and therefore the
analysis I provide can be considered conservative.
21This comment underscores the relevance of possible optimism bias in
professional forecasts of COVID-19 deaths.
22See Hawkins and Iati (2020).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 590594fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 5
Shefrin Biased U.S. COVID-19 Forecasts
FIGURE 2 | Daily confirmed cases per million of COVID-19 in Italy in the U.S.
for the period January 1 through September 16, 2020. Source:
http://www.ourworldindata.org.
and neuroradiologist and fellow of the Hoover Institution,
shared the president’s and Senator Paul’s views about opening
the economy, opening schools, and not wearing masks (Cook,
2020). Dr. Atlas’ perspective sharply differed from eminent
epidemiologists surveyed by McNeil (2020), whose combined
estimates suggest that between 9 and 16% of the U.S. population
had been infected by COVID-19. McNeil notes that the top end of
this range is much less than the 60% infection rates characterizing
areas hard hit by COVID-19, which immunity to coronaviruses
other than SARS-CoV-2 did not prevent.
In retrospect, although the U.S. and Europe experienced
rapidly rising COVID-19 related cases and deaths during the
early months of 2020, by July Europe had managed to reduce
new infections and deaths quite dramatically, while the U.S.
was experiencing an upsurge (Stancati and Pancevski, 2020). In
Europe, new daily confirmed cases peaked at just under 30,000
at the beginning of April, while in the U.S., new daily confirmed
cases peaked at just over 30,000 during the second week of April.
Subsequently, Europe brought down its daily cases to about
5,000 during mid-July23. In contrast, as mentioned above, new
daily cases in the U.S. soared above 70,000. See Figure 2 which
contrasts the number of daily confirmed cases per million for
Italy and the U.S. between January 1 and September 16, 2020.
Keep in mind that, as mentioned above, the head of the Center for
Disease Control had stated that confirmed cases might severely
understate the number of actual infections.
The differences experienced by the U.S. and Europe in July
2020 reflect the different policy decisions made in April 2020;
and there is reason to suspect that those policy decisions reflect
different judgments about the threat from COVID-19, as well as
different preferences about bearing the costs of containment.
Most European governments appeared willing to take
responsibility for coordinating a centralized approach, within
each country, to testing and tracing, in order to detect and
contain emerging clusters of infections. The time series of daily
deaths in Italy displayed in Figure 2 reflect the fact that Italy
23I note that this rate began to increase at the end of July because of reduced social
distancing, mostly by young people.
eventually pursued a focused strategy to reduce its new case rate
sufficiently before reopening its economy, undertook effective
testing and contact tracing, and its population remained vigilant
about social distancing.
In contrast, the U.S. followed a decentralized approach that
was lacking in coordination. In addition, Europeans appear to be
much less concerned about their civil liberties being infringed
because of requirements for wearing masks, whereas in some
portions of the U.S., required mask wearing was viewed as
being highly problematic. In addition, the U.S. has not been
able to execute a sufficiently effective strategy for combining
testing and contact tracing, which becomes more difficult as the
number of cases grows.
JUDGMENTS, DECISIONS, BIASES, AND
PSYCHOLOGY
I suggest that a series of biases, reflecting the influences of
both intentional strategic misrepresentation and unintentional
psychological processes, have characterized key judgments and
decisions about COVID-19 in the U.S. In this section, I focus on
statements, actions, and predictions about the pandemic made
by the following key actors: the president, the leading figures in
the coronavirus task force, and the IHME. I have organized the
section to focus, in turn, on each actor.
The central psychological elements discussed below are
unrealistic optimism and overconfidence (in the sense of
precision), which have occurred in conjunction with motivated
reasoning, elements of groupthink, availability bias, anchoring,
and representativeness24. I place the psychological issues in bold
font, in order to highlight their appearance, and do likewise with
strategic misrepresentation.
The president: The record is clear in respect to the U.S.
president having consistently downplayed the seriousness of
COVID-19, and rejected the advice of the scientific community
on what would constitute an effective response25. In a March 19
call with Woodward (Woodward, 2020), Trump acknowledged:
“I wanted to always play it down. I still like playing it down
because I don’t want to create a panic.” This statement serves
to reconcile the diametrically opposite nature of the president’s
public pronouncements about the pandemic, which reflected
severely unrealistic optimism bias, and his private views which
in retrospect appeared to display only mild optimism bias.
Game theorists use the term strategic misrepresentation to
mean actors with agency intentionally disseminating information
they know to be untrue, as a means to further their own
private interests (Roth, 2002). The record is clear that the
president engaged in strategic misrepresentation, explaining to
Woodward that his motive for making untruthful statements
about the pandemic was to avoid creating panic. If so, then to
what end?
24References for these issues appear in the introductory section and are not
repeated here. In addition, readers are assumed to be familiar with the terminology.
25See Lipton et al. (2020b).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 590594fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 6
Shefrin Biased U.S. COVID-19 Forecasts
In an interview with National Public Radio in February,
pandemic expert Laurie Garrett suggested that the president’s
intent was to downplay the dangers from the pandemic in order
to limit damage to the U.S. economy and financial markets, as an
economic downturn would threaten the prospects of his being reelected the following November (National Public Radio, 2020). In
May 2020, Garrett stated that the White House was interfering
with the CDC, limiting its ability to make pronouncements
that reflected the scientific judgments of its staff (Bruni, 2020).
The extent of this intimidation became a major media story in
September 2020 (Weiland, 2020), and in the first week of October
the president, the first lady, and several White House officials
tested positive for COVID-19 (Baker and Haberman, 2020).
To summarize the main points about the president’s
judgments of U.S. deaths from COVID-19: I suggest that
the misrepresentations associated with the president’s public
pronouncements on the pandemic largely reflect an attempt
to induce bias unrealistic optimism bias in a large segment
of the U.S. population, including some public officials. In this
respect, a key driver of optimism bias is desirability (Weinstein,
1980), interpreted as wishful thinking. I also suggest that
motivated reasoning has reinforced optimism bias, by inducing
this segment of the U.S. public to underweight, if not ignore, the
subsequent events of the pandemic that strongly disconfirmed the
perspective inherent in the president’s earlier pronouncements.
The intent of the misrepresentations, I suggest, has been to
foster a political environment that facilitated the relaxation of
containment measures at the end of April in order to reopen
the economy at that time. As I discuss below, doing so appears
to have induced a surge of COVID-19 cases beginning in June
and continuing through the summer and beyond, with messaging
from the White House that consistently downplayed both the
statistics on cases and deaths as well as the views of traditional
medical scientists and epidemiologists. That the president himself
contracted COVID-19 after flouting the need for masks also
appears to be consistent with unrealistic optimism.
IHME: The IHME uses a proprietary statistical forecasting
methodology that makes use of multiple variables. Although the
IHME does not provide details of their forecasting methodology,
they do say that IHME methodology for projecting deaths is
based on models that are different from most other research
groups, because of IHME’s emphasis on fitting the patterns of
daily mortality observed in the experiences of other geographic
areas such as Wuhan, Italy and Spain.
As Dr, Birx stated on March 29, the IHME’s perspective
was similar to her own. She also mentioned that she had
reviewed 12 different models from institutions that included
Imperial College London and Columbia University. Notably, the
Reich Lab at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst tracks
most of these models, and uses them to compile an aggregate
“ensemble” forecast.
Figure 3 displays the IHME projections, published on April
15, 2020, of the cumulative number of U.S. deaths attributable to
COVID-19 for the period April 16 to August 4, 2020. Notice that
there are three projections in the figure: a point forecast along
with a low forecast and high forecast defining a 95% confidence
interval for each forecast date.
FIGURE 3 | For the period February 29 through July 31, 2020, IHME
projection of cumulative deaths from COVID-19 in the U.S., consisting of a
point forecast (totdeath_mean) and the lower bound (totdeath_lower) and
upper bound (totdeath_upper) of a 95% forecast confidence interval. IHME
projection is as of April 15, 2020. Source: www.healthdata.org.
According to the point forecast in Figure 3, the COVID-19
outbreak in the U.S. would have been fully contained by August 4,
at just over 60,000 deaths, with 95% containment being achieved
by May 5. I note that the forecasts of daily deaths, computed
as the first difference of the mean cumulative forecast, was the
lowest among all professional forecasts of COVID-19 deaths
compiled by the Reich Lab, and much lower than the estimates in
Eichenbaum et al. (2020). While most forecasts featured positive
daily deaths after May 5, the IHME daily forecast fell to near
zero after May 5.
Consider whether the forecast(s) displayed in Figure 3 exhibit
unrealistic optimism and overconfidence26. Formally, unrealistic
optimism features the mean forecast of number of deaths
being too low, while overconfidence features the width of the
confidence intervals being too narrow.
To test formally for unrealistic optimism, I compare the
IHME mean cumulative death forecast trajectory with the actual
death series between April 16 and August 4. See Figure 4, which
shows the IHME mean forecast from April 15 lying well below
subsequent actual death totals from COVID-19. A formal t-test
of optimism bias is based on the ratio of the actual series to the
point forecast series. With the null hypothesis being no bias, a
trend regression of the time series for this ratio should feature
an intercept of 1 and a slope coefficient of 0. A trend regression
on the actual series exhibits an intercept of 1.0 and a positive
slope coefficient with a t-statistic of 96. This result supports the
conclusion of unrealistic optimism bias. As can be seen from
Figure 4, the IHME projection of full containment by August 4,
2020 also exhibits unrealistic optimism bias.
To test formally for overconfidence (in the sense of excess
precision), I compare the relative frequency with which actual
deaths lie outside the IHME’s confidence interval between April
26See Shefrin (2020) for a prospective discussion of these IHME projections, rather
than a retrospective discussion.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 590594fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 7
Shefrin Biased U.S. COVID-19 Forecasts
FIGURE 4 | For the period February 29 through August 4, 2020, actual
cumulative deaths from COVID-19 in the U.S. (Actual Cum Deaths), IHME
projection of cumulative deaths from COVID-19 in the U.S., as of April 15,
2020, consisting of a point forecast (totdeath_mean) and the lower bound
(totdeath_lower) and upper bound (totdeath_upper) of a 95% forecast
confidence interval. Sources: www.healthdata.org,
http://www.ourworldindata.org.
16 and August 4. Overall, the IHME forecast displays slight
overconfidence with 85.6%, not the required 95%, of actual deaths
lying with the confidence band in Figure 4. However, notice
that the IHME’s projections exhibit underconfidence in the left
portion of the horizon, because the actual series lies completely
within the confidence band, and overconfidence in the right
portion of the horizon, when the actual series moves outside, and
remains outside the confidence band.
After the March 29 White House press briefing, American
media outlets began to pay disproportionate attention to IHME
projections. Professor Mokdar emerged as the chief spokesperson
for IHME. As COVID-related deaths surged in the first half of
April, Professor Mokdar made clear in interviews that IHME was
projecting daily deaths to peak on or about April 12, thereby
suggesting that the worst of the pandemic would soon be over.
Those views were especially appreciated, and communicated by
parties arguing for a rapid reopening of the economy.
I have three points to make about these particular interviews.
First, as far as I can tell, media interviews focused only on
point estimates, not the wide confidence intervals. Indeed, my
impression from viewing several of these videos is that the
confidence with which Dr. Mokdar discussed the point forecasts
did not reflect the width of the IHME confidence intervals. In this
respect, I would characterize the tone of the interview discussions
as consistent with overconfidence (in the sense of precision).
Second, I note that Professor Mokdar stated in interviews
(cited above) that from the first, he and his team have thought
that the total number of deaths would not exceed 100,000. Quite
possibly, the 100,000 figure served as an anchor, in the sense of
anchoring and adjustment bias.
Third, Dr. Mokdar did not just confine himself to describing
IHME projections, but also offered his opinion on reopening the
economy. In this regard, he stated that he thought it was a good
time to begin having discussions about reopening the economy in
a phased way, and that from the outset IHME had been focusing
on both response to the pandemic and recovery. He emphasized
the importance of proceeding with a trial approach, so as to
prevent the virus from resurfacing after a successful lockdown.
He spoke personally about these issues, noting that many of his
friends had lost their jobs or had to close their restaurants.
Because of availability bias, it is plausible that the media’s
attention on IHME led the IHME to exercise disproportionate
influence on the views of the American public relative to other
information sources. For example, Bierman and Levey (2020)
report that based on the IHME projections from early April,
cumulative COVID-19 U.S. deaths might even be less than the
100,000 low end forecast which Dr. Birx had communicated in
the March 29 White House press briefing27
.
In respect to response, recovery, and biases related to
optimism and overconfidence, it is worth noting that on April
12 IHME’s Director Dr. Christopher Murray strongly cautioned
that the IHME projections were conditional on not reopening
the economy too early; and many states began to reopen at the
beginning of May28. On May 4, the IHME sharply revised its
projections upwards, as displayed in Figure 5. I would also point
out that the revised projections were very close to the ensemble
forecast produced by the Reich Lab at this time29
.
The flat portion at the right of Figure 5, meaning the
asymptote, for the mean projection in the revised forecast from
May 4 was 134,475. Notably, Figure 5 shows that optimism bias
disappeared between May 4 and July 430. However, the May 4
forecast was less accurate for the remainder of July as cumulative
deaths climbed above 150,00031. Even the IHME point forecast
of cumulative deaths made on June 27 displayed unrealistic
optimism, being more than 4% too low at the end of July with
forecasted cumulative deaths not crossing 150,000 until August 8.
During July, the IHME began to make its projections
conditional on containment policy. In mid-September, the IHME
offered three projections for January 1, 2021: a high forecast
corresponding to weak containment (“mandates easing”), a low
forecast associated with the universal wearing of masks, and a
27For example, according to a Factiva search, for the 3 months ending May 11,
IHME projections were mentioned in The Wall Street Journal 1,980 times, in
contrast to Imperial College London (542 times) and Columbia University (259
times).
28Before May, the IHME data available on the IHME website did not contain
a variable for social distancing. In June, that variable was subsequently
displayed. Social distancing, as a proxy for overall strength of containment, is
a critical determining variable of the virus transmission rate. Its omission, or
underweighting, might well have produced optimism bias in the April forecasts
of cumulative U.S. deaths made by IHME.
29Several of the forecasts monitored by the Reich Lab at the University of
Massachusetts have consistently overestimated cumulative U.S. deaths from
COVID-19, thereby displaying unrealistic pessimism. The same is true for
the framework developed by Eichenbaum et al. (2020), which integrates a
macroeconomic model and an epidemiology model, incorporating assumptions
about uncertainty in respect to vaccine availability and potential treatments.
30The revised forecast series actually exhibited mild pessimism.
31The revised IHME revised forecast from May 10 is more accurate in predicting
COVID-19 related deaths during July, ending the month at 146,699, a figure
reached on July 26.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 590594fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 8
Shefrin Biased U.S. COVID-19 Forecasts
FIGURE 5 | For the period February 29 through August 4, 2020, actual
cumulative deaths from COVID-19 in the U.S. (Actual Cum Deaths), IHME
projection of cumulative deaths from COVID-19 in the U.S., as of May 8,
2020, consisting of a point forecast (totdeath_mean) and the lower bound
(totdeath_lower) and upper bound (totdeath_upper) of a 95% forecast
confidence interval. Sources: www.healthdata.org,
http://www.ourworldindata.org.
current projection lying between the low and the high. As of
September 18, the point forecasts were, respectively, 445,605,
263,484, and 378,320.
In September, McNeil (2020) reports that the IHME estimated
that only 9% of the U.S. population had been infected by
COVID-19 at that time, far less than the percentage required for
herd immunity. As to the untested theory that immunity from
coronaviruses other than SARS-CoV-2 could contribute to herd
immunity for COVID-19, McNeil quotes Dr. Murray, the IHME’s
head, as saying that this idea is “just nonsense.”
To summarize the main points about the IHME’s projections
of U.S. deaths from COVID-19: During April 2020, the
IHME’s projections exhibited biases related to both unrealistic
optimism and overconfidence. At the time, the forecasts from
the IHME were the most closely followed by the U.S. media
among all institutions forecasting cases and deaths. I suggest
that biased IHME projections during April contributed to
fostering a political environment that facilitated the relaxation of
containment measures at the end of April in order to reopen the
economy at that time. As I mentioned above, doing so appears to
have induced a surge of COVID-19 cases beginning in June and
continuing through the summer. However, in May, the IHME’s
revised projections became less biased in the short-term (up to 2
months out), although continued to exhibit unrealistic optimism
and overconfidence in the long-term (beyond 2 months).
Key members of the coronavirus task force: During the
first week of April, Dr. Fauci publicly stated that the total
number of U.S. deaths from COVID-19 might be about 60,000,
a figure consistent with the IHME’s point forecast from that
period. In retrospect, this was surprising for two reasons. First,
it came a week after Dr. Birx had first communicated a lower
bound of 100,000. Second, the president’s private estimate for
annual deaths was in the range of 125,000–150,000. In any case,
just as with the IHME point forecast from that period, 60,000
was much too low, reflecting significant optimism bias on the
part of Dr. Fauci.
The president’s public pronouncements set the tone for
government officials, especially the group within the White
House that was charged with setting pandemic policy and which
was led by the Chief of Staff. Most of the group members were
aides to the President, and only one member was a public health
official, and that was Dr. Birx.
Groupthink is a phenomenon in which group members
display insufficient devil’s advocacy and are prone to downplay
judgmental differences because they feel the need to support the
position of the group leader or are concerned that expressing
differences of opinion will weaken the group’s esprit de corps. I
suggest that elements of groupthink operated in White House
decision making.
Garrett, quoted in Bruni (2020), speaks of Drs. Birx and Fauci
having to “tiptoe around a president’s tender ego.” Coverage
by The New York Times indicates that during April, Dr. Birx,
presented information which supported what the president was
hoping to hear, information that would justify reopening the U.S.
economy as early as possible. Notably, Dr. Fauci, who was not
invited to be a member of the inner group, frequently delivered
public messages that were opposite to those of the president,
and in July became the target of a campaign by the Chief of
Staff to undermine his credibility. In this respect, Dr. Fauci,
described himself as “skunk at the garden party” for offering
a more pessimistic outlook than what the president had been
communicating32
.
It is possible that there is evidence to the contrary, but if not,
it seems plausible to suggest that White House policy makers
ignored Dr. Murray’s April 12 warning mentioned above. In this
regard, the New York Times coverage highlights the failure of
Dr. Birx’s framework to control for the impact on reduced social
distancing as a result of reopening the economy. In this regard,
the IHME reports that social distancing peaked at the same time
new (daily) cases, and then began to decline. It is also plausible
to suggest that invoking the IHME’s projections when supportive
of the policy they favored, but ignoring the warnings when they
regarded those warnings as not supportive, is consistent with
motivated reasoning.
During the first week of August, in a public address, Dr. Birx
indicated that the pandemic was entering a new phase in the
U.S., as the virus spread into rural areas. Her remarks drew
a rebuke from the president, communicated through a tweet.
The president suggested that Dr. Birx’s remarks were critical of
his policies, and that she was responding to negative remarks
about her by the Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives.
The Speaker’s remarks followed the publication of an article
by the New York Times (Shear et al., 2020) that contained
an unflattering description of Dr. Birx’s role in White House
decision making.
The New York Times article mentioned that the modeling
done by Dr. Birx during April had inappropriately extrapolated
32See Shear et al. (2020).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 590594fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 9
Shefrin Biased U.S. COVID-19 Forecasts
the experience of Italy to the U.S33. Dr. Birx responded to
the article by saying that she wished the New York Times
would have interviewed her for the article, and emphasized
her reliance on data, a practice she had developed in a career
spanning four decades.
Being data driven is different from analyzing data using
techniques that are unbiased (Fildes et al., 2009; Goodwin,
2017; Harvey, 2007). The issue about placing excessive weight
on the experience of Italy when developing predictions about
the U.S. relates to psychological biases stemming from reliance
on representativeness and similarity (Kahneman and Tversky,
1973; Tversky, 1977). Did Dr. Birx misjudge the degree to which
the U.S. and Italy were similar, and the degree to which the
experience of Italy was representative of the situation in which
the U.S. found itself? The same questions apply to the projections
made by the IHME in April 2020 (see Figures 1, 2).
During a public presentation in early August, Dr. Birx
responded to a question about whether the number of U.S.
COVID-19 related deaths would surpass 300,000 by the end
of 2020, a figure suggested by a former commissioner of the
Food and Drug Administration. Dr. Birx responded to the
question by saying “anything is possible,” and noted that such
an outcome would be far less likely if Americans practiced
appropriate social distancing and avoided mass gatherings
(see Hawkins and Iati, 2020).
Keep in mind that the IHME projections made in midSeptember 2020, and ending January 1, 2021 lie above 300,000
and in addition display no asymptotes, meaning that by January
2021 the IHME’s projection curves had not yet plateaued. Indeed,
the IHME website states that IHME leaders believe that the
pandemic will be no more than half over by the end of 2020.
In mid-August, Dr. Birx expanded on these points, in remarks
at a conference, by coming back to the issue of Italy, saying: “I
wish that when we went into lockdown, we looked like Italy.
When Italy locked down, I mean, people weren’t allowed out
of their houses, they couldn’t come out but once every 2 weeks
to buy groceries for 1 hour and they had to have a certificate
that said they were allowed. Americans don’t react well to that
kind of prohibition” (Mascarenhas et al., 2020). These comments
speak to the issues of bias stemming from representativeness and
similarity mentioned above. In respect to the U.S., Dr. Birx also
commented that: “Tens of thousands of lives can be saved if we
wear masks, and we don’t have parties in our backyards... taking
those masks off ”34
.
Figure 6 displays the cumulative deaths from COVID-19
for a series of select countries. Notice that the curves for all
countries shown, except the U.S. and Brazil reach plateaus at
the right. The U.S. and Brazil stand in this regard. According
33Italy’s initial response to the outbreak was weak, as reflected in the slogan
“Milano non si ferma,” meaning Milan does not stop.
34The same article quotes Jared Kushner, another member of the White House
coronavirus decision group, who took issue with Dr. Birx’s comments. Kushner
made the point that the group’s intent was to establish policy so that the U.S.
healthcare system would not be inundated by COVID-19 patients to the same
extent as Italy. In this respect, the number of deaths per capita are similar for the
U.S. and Italy; however, Italy only had 25% of the confirmed cases per million as
the U.S., and so its fatality rate was much higher. At the same time, cases and deaths
per capital have plateaued in Italy relative to the U.S.
FIGURE 6 | Cumulative deaths from COVID-19, per million, for select
countries between January 1 and September 16, 2020. The countries are the
United States (USA). Italy, the United Kingdom (UK), India, China, Germany,
South Korea, and Brazil. The curves for Italy and the United States are
emphasized with thicker lines.
to Dr. Birx, the difference between achieving a plateau, and not,
centers on containment policy such as the wearing of masks and
social distancing35
.
To summarize the main points about the judgments of Drs.
Birx and Fauci about U.S. deaths from COVID-19: I suggest
that unrealistically optimistic forecasts from Drs. Birx and Fauci
during April, especially Dr. Birx because of her role in White
House decision making, contributed to fostering a political
environment that facilitated the relaxation of containment
measures at the end of April in order to reopen the economy at
that time. As I discussed, doing so appears to have induced a surge
of COVID-19 cases beginning in June and continuing through
the summer. There is reason to believe that elements associated
with groupthink might have impacted Dr. Birx who has struggled
to deal with the president’s strategic misrepresentation policy and
strong personality.
After negative coverage in July from the New York Times
about her actions in the White House, Dr. Birx made a series
of public statements about weak containment measures in the
U.S. Notably, she implicitly explained the source of bias in
her April forecasts, namely the over-extrapolation of Italy’s
experience with COVID-19. She also downplayed the possibility
of reaching 300,000 U.S. deaths from COVID-19 by the end of
2020. However, IHME’s point forecasts from mid-September do
indeed feature more than 300,000 U.S. deaths from COVID-19
by January 1, 2021. By the end of 2020, if not before, it will be
possible to test whether Dr. Birx’s judgments continued to feature
unrealistic optimism bias.
Media reporting indicates that the addition of Dr. Atlas,
mentioned above, to the coronavirus task force, has made the
work of that body more difficult, or “nightmarish” to use the
term attributed to Dr. Birx (Acosta, 2020). Whereas Drs. Birx
35In the second half of September, corresponding to the right end of Figure 6, new
cases began to surge in the UK, France, and Germany.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 November 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 590594fpsyg-11-590594 October 31, 2020 Time: 21:3 # 10
Shefrin Biased U.S. COVID-19 Forecasts
and Fauci were attempting to emphasize the importance of
measures such as mask wearing and social distancing, Dr. Atlas
was downplaying the need to do so, while promoting the view
that the U.S. was close to or had already reached herd immunity.
The president’s public position has been much closer to that of
Dr. Atlas who in August began to appear next to the president
during press briefings about the pandemic (Acosta, 2020).
CONCLUSION
During September 2020, the total number of U.S. COVID-19
deaths surpassed 200,000. This number was considerably larger
than the forecasts made in the first 4 months of the year by
President Trump, the president’s medical advisers Drs. Deborah
Birx and Anthony Fauci, and the Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation (IHME) at the University of Washington.
The president’s forecasts mostly reflected strategic
manipulation, an attempt to induce unrealistic optimism in the
U.S. in order to limit containment measures, thereby mitigating
the impact on the U.S. economy and financial markets. The
manipulation featured a series of psychological phenomena,
such as availability bias, desirability, elements of groupthink,
anchoring and adjustment, representativeness, and similarity.
Biased forecasts of cases and deaths made by Drs. Birx,
Fauci, and the IHME in March and April contributed to
fostering a political environment that facilitated the relaxation
of containment measures at the end of April in order to reopen
the economy at that time. Notably, the IHME’s projections in
mid-April were unrealistically optimistic in respect to both total
number of U.S. deaths from COVID-19 and the projected dates
for full containment. The premature relaxation of containment
measures appears to have induced a surge of COVID-19 cases
beginning in June that swept across the country.
Drs. Birx, Fauci, and the IHME subsequently revised their
April forecasts, stressing the need for the U.S. public to follow
prudent containment measures such as wearing masks and
maintaining social distancing. The IHME, which in April forecast
that by August 4 the pandemic would be fully contained, stated
in September that it then expected that on January 1, 2021, the
country would only be halfway through the pandemic. Notably,
the IHME’s forecasts for more than 2 months out has consistently
exhibited overconfidence as well as unrealistic optimism.
Dr. Birx, who had often stood next to the president during his
press briefings on the pandemic, and was reluctant to contradict
him in public, began to do so in August. Her remarks were
especially instructive about some of the thinking in April 2020.
At that time her view, and also that of the IHME, was that U.S.
fatalities from COVID-19 would follow a similar trajectory as
Italy. However, the situation in Italy was not representative of
the U.S. in respect to willingness to tolerate strong lockdown
measures. Whereas, the government of Italy eventually chose to
impose strong lockdown measures, and Italians mostly complied,
a large segment of the U.S. population resisted containment,
and resonated to President Trump’s messaging on this point.
Figures 1, 2, 6 provide a stark graphic visualization of how the
experiences of Italy and the U.S. differed.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The listed author has approved the article for publication.




NEW PAPER


CASE STUDY
The psychology behind video games during COVID-19
pandemic: A case study of Animal Crossing: New Horizons
Lin Zhu
Department of Educational and Counseling
Psychology, University at Albany, Albany,
New York
Correspondence
Lin Zhu, Division of Educational Psychology
and Methodology, University at Albany, State
University of New York, 1400 Washington
Avenue, Albany 12222, NY.
Email: lzhu5@albany.edu
Peer Review
The peer review history for this article is
available at https://publons.com/publon/10.
1002/hbe2.221.
Abstract
With the emerging outbreak of a novel coronavirus, millions of people have been
followed social distancing rules to self-quarantine at home. Given the continuation of
this pandemic trend, people who have suffered from the anxiety of coronavirus and
experienced social isolation their psychological well-being started to be concerned.
During this time, one popular video game called “Animal Crossing: New Horizons”
successfully get everyone's attention and led us to explore the psychology behind
video games. On the one hand, New Horizons provides a dreamland for the players
to temporally escape from the cruel reality with a risk of losing in escapism. On the
other hand, the New Horizons world becomes a perfect social platform to keep social
interaction with others to get rid of the loneliness.
KEYWORDS
Animal Crossing, coronavirus, COVID-19, escapism, loneliness, New Horizons, psychological
well-being, social isolation, video game
1 | OVERVIEW OF PHENOMENON
In the past several months, many of us are either experiencing lockdown or voluntarily following the social distancing rules to minimize
our time spent outside due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Fighting the epidemic is a serious matter. Comparing with the importance that people attached to the epidemic trend and healthcare, the
release of a video game seems trivial to notice. However, Animal
Crossing: New Horizons, a life simulation video game, brought unexpected magic to get the public attention and let us rethink the psychology behind the game.
New Horizons is the fifth main series title in the Animal Crossing
series. It is developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo
Switch, released in all regions on March 20, 2020. As in previous
installments in the Animal Crossing series, Animal Crossing: New Horizons is a nonlinear life simulation game played in real-time. In New
Horizons, a player assumes the role of a customizable character who
moves to a deserted island to build and expand their home by granting
a loan, exploring their surroundings, interacting with a cast of adorable
animal villagers, catching bugs, collecting fish, designing their own
fashion, growing flowers, participating in annual events, and much
more. The game proceeds in an open-ended fashion and develops it
into a community of anthropomorphic animals. Players can also have
social interaction with other players online, which is one of the most
attractive parts of the game.
New Horizons have received massively popularity and acclaim
from game players and critics all over the world. It sold five million
digital copies in its first month, breaking the console game record for
most digital units sold in a single month. It became the best-selling
game in the Animal Crossing series after 6 weeks with 13.41 million
units sold (Wikipedia, 2020). At press time, the Nintendo Switch has
been sold out almost everywhere online and in-store at many popular
retailers.
2 | THE PSYCHOLOGY BEHIND
THE “GAME”
Many critics attribute its popularity to the “right timing.” As
Khan (2020) stated in The New York Times, the success has been
Received: 16 July 2020 Revised: 25 July 2020 Accepted: 3 August 2020
DOI: 10.1002/hbe2.221
Hum Behav & Emerg Tech. 2021;3:157–159. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/hbe2 © 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC 157partially attributed to its release during the COVID-19 pandemic, with
players seeking a sense of escapism in their self-quarantine at home.
Indeed, New Horizons could not have come at a better time. Or rather,
we can just consider the game world as the “La-la land,” a sort of
escape that has captivated in our fantasies with the world in the grip
of the epidemic; or, it plays an unexpected role to provide comfort
and social connection in a time of isolation and struggle. Therefore, it
is not hard to discover the two main psychological success behind this
phenomenon: first, it captures people's instinctive to escape from
realistic difficulties and their yearning to chase a peaceful and harmonious life; then, it satisfies people's unwillingness to be lonely and
their deep inner desire for the social interaction to get rid of the
loneliness.
3 | A DREAMLAND OR A TEMPORARY
ESCAPE?
If there is a dreamland to escape from the coronavirus, video game
must be one. In New Horizons, players take the role of the only
human being who lives on an island surrounded by pudgy anthropomorphic animals. Inside the game world, there are no mountains of
work and demanding bosses; you do not have to worry about that
tomorrow might be the day to hand in your homework; of course,
there is also no exact date on which you should pay back what you
owe; most importantly, there is no disaster and disease exists, it is
like a haven that keeps you away from COVID-19. The game is
played at a relaxed pace, in which the player can choose what they
want to do on any given day. “There's no nastiness and violence that
exists. They get absorbed into the day-to-day things without the
real-world consequences,” said Romana Ramzan, a lecturer at Glasgow Caledonian University in Scotland. “It's like you've been transported to a parallel universe where you've always wanted but hard
to reach out” (Khan, 2020). Compare to the everyday pressure you
have to face from reality, who would not want to live in this
dreamland?
However, from the other point of view, this dreamland only provides a virtual world over the cloud that allowing you to escape from
the cruel reality temporarily, eventually, this escapism could not last
long after all. This delicate relationship represents a microcosm of
the psychological problems that people experience in real life.
According to Hussain and Griffiths (2009), over one-third of gamers
claimed that relaxation and escape was a key function of playing. In
another study of online gaming, the best predictor of a high score on
Young (1998) for Internet addiction was escapism, indicating that
players use online games to avoid thinking about real-life problems.
Players who have the motivation to escape from life problems may
experience more negative outcomes from their online gaming
(Kardefelt-Winther, 2014). In our case, New Horizons may temporarily play a “shelter” role to provide a simple happy life to the players;
however, the negative outcomes of escapism that may affect people's psychological well-being should be concerned in future studies
as well.
4 | “ONLY” BUT NOT LONELY
Social interaction is another highlight of the game's success, and it is
highly related to ones' psychological well-being to get rid of the
loneliness. Even being the only human on the island in the game
does not mean that you have to live alone there. The most fascinating part of the game is that the players can continue to socialize virtually even they remain in physical isolation for long periods during
the COVID-19 pandemic. As we all know, social isolation has
significant implications for mental and physical health. There is one
meta-analysis estimates that loneliness and social isolation can
be as damaging to health as smoking 15 cigarettes a day
(Edwards, 2013). Research has shown that people who experienced
socially isolated may get a greater risk of becoming lonely and that
being surrounded by a social network of meaningful personal relationships is crucial for feeling socially embedded and for the alleviation of loneliness (De Jong Gierveld, Van Tilburg, & Dykstra, 2006).
The benefits of playing games with others online have been
highlighted in research by Cole and Griffiths (2007). They found that
75% of the participants made appropriate pals due to taking part in
online games and 30% met a romantic associate via a game. These
friendships are often of excessive-quality, with over one in three
people pointing out that they talk to their online friends about problems that they would not speak to their offline friends
(Platinum, 2020). New Horizons provides a perfect social platform to
expand personal relationships with others no matter for the introverts or extraverts. The gamers not only can invite others to their
islands to trade items but also can talk and hang out virtually. There
are even real stories of people having weddings on the game after
their ceremonies had been canceled in real life. It is a thoughtful
way to make memories and have some laughs during the time they
cannot in person. New Horizons fulfills the players' desire to continue social contact with each other during the COVID-19 epidemic
and further reducing their feelings of loneliness.
5 | CONCLUSION
The coronavirus outbreak has put a heavy stone onto everyone's
shoulder and everyone is trying their best to cope with it in their own
way. As a global epidemic, it has brought too many painful memories.
The pressure and anxiety caused by the fear of viruses in real life
make people pay more attention to mental health problems.
Video games have always appeared to the public with a relatively
negative image. However, in this crisis, their players in some ways are
benefited. New Horizons has opened the door to a parallel world,
bought spiritual comfort and sustenance to their fans. People can easily find calm and peace in the game and escape from the suffering of
reality to alleviate psychological anxiety and depression. However, at
the same time, the negative outcomes of escapism that affect people's
psychological well-being should be concerned in future studies. In the
game, continuing social interaction with old friends or making new friends could be a relaxing and fun way to stay connected with loved
158 ZHUones and helps people to get rid of the loneliness caused by social isolation. Overall, during the COVID-19 pandemic, no matter the experiences of anxiety and escapism, or the social isolation and loneliness,
New Horizons made us realize the psychology behind video games has
far more than we have already known. In front, more treasures are
waiting to be explored for future studies.
ORCID



NEW PAPER



Positive education and school psychology during covid-19 pandamic
Jolanta Burke and Gokmen Arslan

Journal of Positive School Psychology
2020, Vol. 4, No. 2, 137–139
http://journalppw.com/jppw
https://doi.org/10.47602/jpsp.v4i2.243
1Department of Education, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland.
2Department of Guidance and Psychological Counseling, Burdur Mehmet Akif Ersoy University, Burdur, Turkey
As coronavirus rages around the globe, its impact 
extends to 1.6 billion students (94% of the learner 
population) across almost 200 countries (UN, 2020), 
many of whom do not have adequate resources to fully 
engage in remote learning (Hall et al., 2020).
Coronavirus pandemic has quickly changed the context 
in which people live, increasing exposure to risks. The 
pandemic’s disruptions are far-reaching. Compared to 
pre-pandemic indicators, many young people are 
craving the social aspect of their school lives (Burke & 
Dempsey, 2020), reporting less engagement with play 
(Moore et al., 2020), and lower levels of wellbeing 
(Quinn et al., 2020). Teachers and school leaders find 
remote instruction challenging (Devitt et al., 2020), and 
the prospect operating schools side-by-side with the 
pandemic fills many with apprehension (Burke, 2020). 
In these unsettled times, more than ever, positive school 
psychology research is required.
Academic databases indicate that less than 1% of 
the current COVID-19-related research considers a 
positive psychological perspective, and there are even 
fewer studies in the field of positive education during 
the pandemic. A growing number of academic 
publications demonstrate the potential ways positive 
psychology can help educators manage distance 
learning during the pandemic successfully. Following 
past positive education research findings, we recognize 
the significant role that meaning-making, psychological 
flexibility, resilience, belonging, or positive affect can
play during a global crisis (e.g., Arslan, 2020; Arslan et 
al., 2020; Fredrickson et al., 2003; Frydenberg et al., 
2012; Tugade & Fredrickson, 2004; Wong, 2011; 
Yıldırım, & Güler, 2020; Yıldırım, & Solmaz, 2020). 
Nonetheless, expanded positive school psychology 
research that bridges the science-to-practice gap is 
needed to counteract the impact of COVID-19 on the 
school communities worldwide.
Theories suggest that close family and school 
relations foster young people’s mental health and 
promote their psychological resilience during the 
pandemic (Arslan, 2020; Prime et al., 2020). Some 
authors acknowledge the potential of COVID-19 to 
initiate post-traumatic growth in both individuals and 
communities (Shakespeare-Finch et al., 2020). In a 
rapid survey carried out merely one week after the 
pandemic-related school closure, with almost 3,000 
school leaders, half of them reported that the school 
closure would positively affect their staff and students 
(Burke & Dempsey, 2020). Similar findings were 
reported post-SARS pandemic. In the SARS study, the 
majority (86%) of people directly affected by the SARS 
virus acknowledged the benefits of experiencing it 
(Cheng et al., 2006). As traumatic as COVID-19 is to
many now, it could also become a springboard for 
positive change, especially in schools that draw on 
positive education research to support staff wellbeing 
and sustain programs and services that foster students’ 
social-emotional health.
Growing evidence demonstrates that positive 
changes are indeed emerging among the pandemicaffected school communities. For example, in a survey 
of almost 1,000 school principals during the early 
pandemic-related lockdown, many leaders reported 
they began new hobbies, created healthier personal 
routines, and started to exercise more regularly. They 
also enjoyed a less hectic pace of life than they had 
before the pandemic lockdown (Dempsey & Burke, 
2020). Parents reported similar experiences. Many Burke & Arslan 138
found that caring for their children during the lockdown 
resulted in high positive affect levels and increased 
exercising (going for walks, gardening, pursuing a 
hobby; Lades et al., 2020). More such studies are 
needed that highlight the conditions and incidents of 
positive changes during the pandemic.
Although we hope for this public health crisis to end 
soon, the pandemic signifies to be more extended than 
initially expected. Positive school psychology literacy 
is thus necessary for developing science that informed 
evidence helping students to cope with the challenges. 
In this regard, we encourage researchers, counsellors, 
mental health providers, and school authorities to 
develop effective interventions in school context, 
online or face-to-face where applicable, to support 
students' mental health and academic development. For 
example, given that in most countries’ education has 
been done online during pandemic which has potential 
to affect students' sense of belonging to the school and 
mental health, implementation of such interventions 
would be particularly important to promote positive 
mental health. Therefore, we believe that application 
of the principles of positive psychology that emphasizes 
human strengths into school context can play a key role 
for the promotion of positive education and school 
psychology. The Journal of Positive School Psychology 
thus supports these efforts and invites manuscripts 
informing educators and mental health providers of best 
practices that sustain staff, parents, students’ coping, 
resilience, and wellbeing during this most challenging 
worldwide emergency.


NEW PAPER




HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER:
EVOLUTION OF RESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC IN THE U.S.
LUCA MARIA AIELLO1,2
, DANIELE QUERCIA1,3,∗, KE ZHOU1
, MARIOS CONSTANTINIDES1
, SANJA SCEPANOVIC1
,
AND SAGAR JOGLEKAR1
Abstract. Disruptions resulting from an epidemic might often appear to amount to chaos but, in reality, can be
understood in a systematic way through the lens of “epidemic psychology”. According to Philip Strong, the founder
of the sociological study of epidemic infectious diseases, not only is an epidemic biological; there is also the potential
for three psycho-social epidemics: of fear, moralization, and action. This work empirically tests Strong’s model
at scale by studying the use of language of 122M tweets related to the COVID-19 pandemic posted in the U.S.
during the whole year of 2020. On Twitter, we identified three distinct phases. Each of them is characterized by
different regimes of the three psycho-social epidemics. In the refusal phase, users refused to accept reality despite
the increasing number of deaths in other countries. In the anger phase (started after the announcement of the
first death in the country), users’ fear translated into anger about the looming feeling that things were about to
change. Finally, in the acceptance phase, which began after the authorities imposed physical-distancing measures,
users settled into a “new normal” for their daily activities. Overall, refusal of accepting reality gradually died off
as the year went on, while acceptance increasingly took hold. During 2020, as cases surged in waves, so did anger,
re-emerging cyclically at each wave. Our real-time operationalization of Strong’s model is designed in a way that
makes it possible to embed epidemic psychology into real-time models (e.g., epidemiological and mobility models).
Introduction
In our daily lives, our dominant perception is of order. But every now and then chaos threatens that order: epidemics
dramatically break out, revolutions erupt, empires suddenly fall, and stock markets crash. Epidemics, in particular,
present not only collective health hazards but also special challenges to mental health and public order that need
to be addressed by social and behavioral sciences [Van Bavel et al., 2020]. Almost 30 years ago, in the wake of the
AIDS epidemic, Philip Strong, the founder of the sociological study of epidemic infectious diseases, reflected: “the
human origin of epidemic psychology lies not so much in our unruly passions as in the threat of epidemic disease
to our everyday assumptions.” [Strong, 1990] In the recent COVID-19 pandemic [Brooks et al., 2020] (an ongoing
pandemic of a coronavirus disease), it has been shown that the main source of uncertainty and anxiety has indeed
come from the disruption of what Alfred Shutz called the “routines and recipes” of daily life [Schutz et al., 1973]
(e.g., every simple act, from eating at work to visiting our parents, takes on new meanings).
Yet, the chaos resulting from an epidemic turns out to be more predictable than what one would initially expect.
Philip Strong observed that any new health epidemic resulted into three psycho-social epidemics: of fear, moralization, and action. The epidemic of fear represents the fear of catching the disease, which comes with the suspicion
against alleged disease carriers, which, in turn, may spark panic and irrational behavior. The epidemic of moralization is characterized by moral responses both to the viral epidemic itself and to the epidemic of fear, which
may result in either positive reactions (e.g., cooperation) or negative ones (e.g., stigmatization). The epidemic of
action accounts for the rational or irrational changes of daily habits that people make in response to the disease
or as a result of the two other psycho-social epidemics. Strong was writing in the wake of the AIDS/HIV crisis,
but he based his model on studies that went back to Europe’s Black Death in the 14th century. Importantly, he
showed that these three psycho-social epidemics are created by language and incrementally fed through it: language
transmits the fear that the infection is an existential threat to humanity and that we are all going to die; language
depicts the epidemic as a verdict on human failings and as a moral judgment on minorities; and language shapes
the means through which people collectively intend to, however pointless, act against the threat.
There have been numerous studies of how information propagated on social media during epidemic outbreaks
occurred in the past decade, such as Zika [Fu et al., 2016, Wood, 2018, Sommariva et al., 2018], Ebola [Oyeyemi
1Nokia Bell Labs Cambridge, United Kingdom
2
IT University Copenhagen, Denmark
3Centre for Urban Science and Progress, King’s College London, United Kingdom
∗Corresponding author: quercia@cantab.net
arXiv:2007.13169v2 [cs.CY] 7 Jul 20212 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
et al., 2014], and the H1N1 influenza [Chew and Eysenbach, 2010]. Similarly, with the outbreak of COVID-19, people
around the world have been collectively expressing their thoughts and concerns about the pandemic on social media.
As such, researchers studied this epidemic from multiple angles: social media posts have been analyzed in terms of
content and behavioral markers [Hou et al., 2020, Li et al., 2020], and of tracking the diffusion of COVID-related
information [Cinelli et al., 2020] and misinformation [Pulido et al., 2020, Ferrara, 2020, Kouzy et al., 2020, Yang
et al., 2020]. Search queries have suggested specific information-seeking responses to the pandemic [Bento et al.,
2020]. Psychological responses to COVID-19 have been studied mostly though surveys [Wang et al., 2020, Qiu
et al., 2020].
Hitherto, there has never been any large-scale empirical study of whether the use of language during an epidemic
reflects Strong’s model. With the opportunity of having a sufficiently large-scale data at hand, we set out to test
whether Strong’s model did hold on Twitter during COVID-19, and did so at the scale of an entire country, that
of the United States. By running our study on Twitter, we expose the interpretation of our results to a number of
limitations, notably to issues of representativeness [Li et al., 2013], self-presentation biases [Waterloo et al., 2018],
and data noise [Saif et al., 2012, Ferrara et al., 2016]. Indeed, recent surveys estimated that only 22% of U.S.
adults use Twitter [Wojcik and Hughes, 2019], and that the characteristics of these users deviate from the general
population’s: compared to the average adult in the U.S., Twitter users are much younger, are more likely to have
college degrees, and are slightly more likely to identify with the Democratic Party. Despite such limitations, social
media represents the response of a relevant part of the general population to global events, and it does so at a scale
and a granularity that have been so far unattainable by publicly-available data sources.
After operationalizing Strong’s model by using lexicons for psycholinguistic text analysis, upon the collection of
122M tweets about the epidemic from February 1st to December 31st, we conducted a quantitative analysis on the
differences in language style and a thematic analysis of the actual social media posts. The temporal scope of our
study does not capture the full pandemic as it is still ongoing at the time of writing but it includes the three major
contagion waves in the U.S., characterizing the entire year of 2020. The first wave captured the initial diffusion of
the virus in the world, and then its arrival and first peak in the U.S. The following two waves captured subsequent
periods of alarming diffusion.
The three psycho-social epidemics, as theorized by Strong, evolve concurrently over time. In the particular case
of our period of study, we found that this concurrent evolution resulted into three regimes or phases, which are
not part of Strong’s theoretical framework and experimentally emerged. In the first phase (the refusal phase), the
psycho-social epidemic of fear began. Twitter users in the U.S. refused to accept reality: they feared the uncertainty
created by the disruption of what was considered to be “normal”; focused their moral concerns on others in an act
of distancing oneself from others; yet, despite all this, they refused to change the normal course of action. After
the announcement of the first death in the country, the second phase (the anger phase) began: the psycho-social
epidemic of fear intensified while the epidemics of morality and action kicked-off abruptly. Twitter users expressed
more anger than fear about the looming feeling that things were about to change; focused their moral concerns on
oneself in an act of reckoning with what was happening; and suspended their daily activities. After the authorities
imposed physical-distancing measures, the third phase (the acceptance phase) took over: the epidemic of fear started
to fade away while the epidemics of morality and action turned into more constructive and forward-looking social
processes. Twitter users expressed more sadness than anger or fear; focused their moral concerns on the collective
and, in so doing, promoted pro-social behavior; and found a “new normal” in their daily activities, which consisted
of their past daily activities being physically restricted to their homes and neighborhoods. The phase of acceptance
dominated Twitter conversations for the rest of the year, although the anger phase re-emerged cyclically with the
rise of new waves of contagion. In particular, we observed two peaks of anger: when the death toll in the U.S.
reached 100,000 people (second contagion wave), and when President Trump tested positive to COVID-19 (third
contagion wave).
Dataset
From an existing collection of COVID-related tweets [Chen et al., 2020], we gathered 554,941,519 tweets posted
between February 1st up to December 31st. We focused our analysis on the United States, the country where
Twitter penetration is highest. To identify Twitter users living in it, we parsed the free-text location description of
their user profile (e.g., “San Francisco, CA”). We did so by using a set of custom regular expressions that match
variations for the expression “United States of America”, as well as the names of 333 cities and 51 states in the U.S.
(and their combinations). Albeit not always accurate, matching location strings against known location names is
a tested approach that yields good results for a coarse-grained localization at state or country-level [Dredze et al.,
2013]. Overall, we were left with 6,271,835 unique users in the U.S. who posted 122,320,155 tweets in English.HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 3
Before analyzing how our language categories unfolded over time, we experimentally tested whether the number of
data points at hand was sufficient to compute our metrics. It was indeed the case as the number of active users
per day varied from a minimum of 72k on February 2nd to a maximum of 1.84M on March 18th, with and average
of 437k. A small number of accounts tweeted a disproportionately high number of times, reaching a maximum of
15,823 tweets; those were clearly automated accounts, which were discarded by our methodology. As we shall discuss
in Methods, we normalized all our aggregate temporal measures so that they were not affected by the fluctuating
volume of tweets over time.
Methods
Coding Strong’s model. Back in the 1990s, Philip Strong was able not only to describe the psychological impact
of epidemics on social order but also to model it. He observed that the early reaction to major fatal epidemics
is a distinctive psycho-social form and can be modeled along three main dimensions: fear, morality, and action.
During a large-scale epidemic, basic assumptions about social interaction and, more generally, about social order are
disrupted, and, more specifically, they are so by: the fear of others, competing moralities, and the responses to the
epidemic. Crucially, all these three elements are created, transmitted, and mediated by language: language transmits
fears, elaborates on the stigmatization of minorities, and shapes the means through which people collectively respond
to the epidemic [Strong, 1990, Goffman, 2009, Cap, 2016].
As opposed to existing attempts to model psychological and social aspects of epidemic crises [McConnell, 2005,
Khan and Huremovi´c, 2019], Strong’s model meets our three main choice criteria:
(1) Well-grounded. It proposes a comprehensive, highly-cited, and still relevant theoretical model, which is
based on an extensive review of studies of past large-scale epidemics that did span centuries and, as such,
were of different nature, speaking to the generalizability of the framework.
(2) Focused on psycho-social aspects. Its main goal is to characterize people’s psychological and social responses
to epidemics rather than describing how an epidemic unfolds over time.
(3) Directly operationalizable from language use. The description of the psycho-social responses provided by
Strong lends itself to operationalization, as its defining concepts have been mapped to language markers by
previous literature (as Table 1 shows).
We operationalized Strong’s epidemic psychology theoretical framework in two steps. First, three authors handcoded Strong’s seminal paper [Strong, 1990] using line-by-line coding [Gibbs, 2007] to identify keywords that
characterize the three psycho-social epidemics. For each of the three psycho-social epidemics, the three authors
generated independent lists of keywords that were conservatively combined by intersecting them. The words that
were left out by the intersection were mostly synonyms (e.g., “catching disease” as a synonym for “contagion”), so
we did not discard any important concept. According to Strong, the three psycho-social epidemics are intertwined
and, as such, the concepts that define one specific psycho-social epidemic might be relevant to the remaining two
as well. For example, suspicion is an element of the epidemic of fear but is tightly related to stigmatization as well,
a phenomenon that Strong describes as typical of the epidemic of moralization. In our coding exercise, we adhered
as much as possible to the description in Strong’s paper and obtained a strict partition of keywords across psychosocial epidemics. In the second step, the same three authors mapped each of these keywords to language categories,
namely sets of words that reflect how these concepts are expressed in natural language (e.g., words expressing anger
or trust). We took these categories from four existing language lexicons widely used in psychometric studies:
• Linguistic Inquiry Word Count (LIWC) [Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010]. A lexicon of words and word
stems grouped into over 125 categories reflecting emotions, social processes, and basic functions, among
others. The LIWC lexicon is based on the premise that the words people use to communicate can provide
clues to their psychological states [Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010]. It allows written passages to be analyzed
syntactically (how the words are used together to form phrases or sentences) and semantically (an analysis
of the meaning of the words or phrases).
• Emolex [Mohammad and Turney, 2013]. A lexicon that classifies 6k+ words and stems into the eight
primary emotions of Plutchik’s psychoevolutionary theory [Plutchik, 1991].
• Moral Foundation Lexicon [Graham et al., 2009]. A lexicon of 318 words and stems, which are grouped into
5 categories of moral foundations [Graham et al., 2013]: harm, fairness, in-group, authority, and purity.
Each of which is further split into expressions of virtue or vice.4 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
• Pro-social behavior [Frimer et al., 2014]. A lexicon of 146 pro-social words and stems, which have been
found to be frequently used when people describe pro-social goals[Frimer et al., 2014].
The three authors grouped similar keywords together and mapped groups of keywords to one or more language
categories. This grouping and mapping procedure was informed by previous studies that investigated how these
keywords are expressed through language. These studies are listed in Table 1.
Language categories over time. We considered that a tweet contained a language category c if at least one
of the tweet’s words or stems belonged to that category. The tweet-category association is binary and disregards
the number of matching words within the same tweet. That is mainly because, in short snippets of text (tweets
are limited to 280 characters), multiple occurrences are rare and do not necessarily reflect the intensity of a category [Russell, 2013]. For each language category c, we counted the number of users Uc(t) who posted at least
one tweet at time t containing that category. We then obtained the fraction of users who mentioned category c by
dividing Uc(t) by the total number of users U(t) who tweeted at time t:
(1) fc(t) = Uc(t)
U(t)
.
Computing the fraction of users rather than the fraction of tweets prevents biases introduced by exceptionally active
users, thus capturing more faithfully the prevalence of different language categories in our Twitter population.
This also helps discounting the impact of social bots, which tend to have anomalous levels of activity (especially
retweeting [Bessi and Ferrara, 2016]).
Different categories might be verbalized with considerably different frequencies. For example, the language category
“I” (first-person pronoun) from the LIWC lexicon naturally occurred much more frequently than the category
“death” from the same lexicon. To enable a comparison across categories, we standardized all the fractions:
(2) zc(t) = fc(t) − µ[0,T](fc)
σ[0,T](fc)
,
where µ(fc) and σ(fc) represent the mean and standard deviation of the fc(t) scores over the whole time period,
from t = 0 (February 1st) to t = T (April 16th). These z-scores ease also the interpretation of the results as
they represent the relative variation of a category’s prevalence compared to its average: they take on values higher
(lower) than zero when the original value is higher (lower) than the average.
Other behavioral markers. To assess the validity of our operationalization of Strong’s model, we compared its
results with the output of alternative state-of-the-art text-mining techniques, and with real-world mobility patterns.
Interaction types. We compared the results obtained via word-matching with a state-of-the-art deep learning tool
for Natural Language Processing designed to capture fundamental types of social interactions from conversational
language [Choi et al., 2020]. This tool uses Long Short-Term Memory neural networks (LSTMs) [Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber, 1997] that take in input a 300-dimensional GloVe representation of words [Pennington et al., 2014]
and output a series of confidence scores in the range [0, 1] that estimate the likelihood that the text expresses certain
types of social interactions. The classifiers exhibited a very high classification performance, up to an Area Under
the ROC Curve (AUC) of 0.98. AUC is a performance metric that measures the ability of the model to assign
higher confidence scores to positive examples (i.e., text characterized by the type of interaction of interest) than to
negative examples, independent of any fixed decision threshold; the expected value for random classification is 0.5,
whereas an AUC of 1 indicates a perfect classification.
Out of the ten interaction types that the tool can classify [Deri et al., 2018], three were detected frequently with
likelihood > 0.5 in our Twitter data: conflict (expressions of contrast or diverging views [Tajfel et al., 1979]), social
support (giving emotional or practical aid and companionship [Fiske et al., 2007]), and power (expressions that
mark a person’s power over the behavior and outcomes of another [Blau, 1964]).
Given a tweet’s textual message m and an interaction type i, we used the classifier to compute the likelihood
score li(m) that the message contains that interaction type. We then binarized the confidence scores using a
threshold-based indicator function:
(3) l
θ
i
(m) = (
1, if li(m) ≥ θi
0, otherwise
Following the original approach [Choi et al., 2020], we used a different threshold for each interaction type, as the
distributions of their likelihood scores tend to vary considerably. We thus picked conservatively θi as the value of
the 85th percentile of the distribution of the confidence scores li
, thus favoring precision over recall. Last, similar toHOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 5
Max. peak
Keywords Supporting literature Lang. categories 1st 2
nd 3
rd
Fear
emotional maelstrom swear (liwc) .03 .54 .14
anger (liwc) .07 .14 .16
negemo (liwc) .09 .17 .02
These LIWC categories have been used to analyze
complex emotional responses to traumatic events
(PTSD) and to characterize the language of people
suffering from mental health [Coppersmith et al., 2014]
sadness (liwc) -.09 .04 .19
fear Fear-related words like the ones included in Emolex have
been often used to measure fear of both tangible and
intangible threats [Kahn et al., 2007, Gill et al., 2008]
fear (emolex) .07 .05 .03
death (liwc) .45 .16 .03
anxiety, panic The anxiety category of LIWC has been used to study different forms of anxiety in social media [Shen and Rudzicz,
2017]
anxiety (liwc) .31 .46 -.15
disorientation By definition, the tentative category of LIWC expresses
uncertainty [Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010]
tentative (liwc) .02 .10 .03
suspicion Suspicion is often formalized as lack of trust [Deutsch,
1958]
trust (liwc) -.04 .03 .12
irrationality The negate category of LIWC has been used to measure
cognitive distorsions and irrational interpretations of reality [Simms et al., 2017]
negate (liwc) .08 .15 .07
religion Religious expressions from LIWC have been used to study
how people appeal to religious entities during moments of
hardship [Shaw et al., 2007]
religion (liwc) .12 .17 .22
contagion These LIWC categories were used to study the
perception of diseases in cancer support groups, people
affected by eating disorder, and alcoholics [Alpers et al.,
2005, Wolf et al., 2013, Kornfield et al., 2018]
body (liwc) .01 .27 .13
feel (liwc) -.04 .34 .03
Moralization
warn, risk avoidance,
risk perception
A LIWC category used to model risk perception connected
to epidemics [Hou et al., 2020]
risk (liwc) .04 .15 .08
polarization, segregation Different personal pronouns have been used to study inand out-group dynamics and to characterize language
markers of racism [Arguello et al., 2006]; personal
pronouns and markers of differentiation have been
considered in studies on racist language [Figea et al.,
2016]
I (liwc) -.10 .49 .26
we (liwc) -.09 .24 .22
they (liwc) .03 .02 .10
differ (liwc) .01 .08 .05
stigmatization, blame,
abuse
Pronouns I and they were used to quantify blame in
personal [Borelli and Sbarra, 2011] and political context [Windsor et al., 2014]. Hate speech is associated with
they-oriented statements [ElSherief et al., 2018]
(same categories as
previous line)
cooperation,
coordination, collective
consciousness
The moral value of care expresses the will of protecting
others [Graham et al., 2009]. Cooperation is often
verbalized by referencing the in-group and by expressing
affiliation [Rezapour et al., 2019]
affiliation (liwc) -.16 .25 .22
care (moral virtue) -.09 .12 .19
prosocial (prosocial) -.10 .07 .25
faith in authority The moral value of authority expresses the will of playing
by the rules of a hierarchy versus challenging it [Rezapour
et al., 2019]
authority (moral
virtue)
-.04 .11 .13
authority enforcement The power category of LIWC expresses exertion of dominance [Tausczik and Pennebaker, 2010]
power (liwc) -.01 .02 .14
Action
restrictions, travel, privacy
motion (liwc) .02 .04 .06
home (liwc) -.15 .38 .20
work (liwc) -.05 .04 .22
social (liwc) -.06 .09 .08
Daily habits concern mainly people’s experience of
home, work, leisure, and movement between
them [Gonzalez et al., 2008]
leisure (liwc) .05 .16 .10
Table 1. Operationalization of the Strong’s epidemic psychology theoretical framework. From Strong’s paper,
three annotators extracted keywords that characterize the three psycho-social epidemics and mapped them to
relevant language categories from existing language lexicons used in psychometric studies. Category names are
followed by the name of their corresponding lexicon in parenthesis. We support the association between keywords
and language categories with examples of supporting literature. To summarize how the use of the language categories varies across the three temporal states, we computed the peak values of the different language categories
(days when their standardized fractions reached the maximum), and reported the percentage increase at peak
compared to the average over the whole time period; in each row, the maximum value is highlighted in bold.6 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
how we constructed temporal signals for the language categories, we counted the number of users Ui(t) who posted
at least one tweet at time t that contains interaction type i. We then obtained the fraction of users who mentioned
interaction type i by dividing Ui(t) by the total number of users U(t) who tweeted at time t:
(4) fi(t) = Ui(t)
U(t)
.
Last, we min-max normalized these fractions, considering the minimum and maximum values during the whole time
period [0, T]:
(5) fi(t) = fi(t) − min[0,T](fi)
max[0,T](fi) − min[0,T](fi)
.
Mentions of medical entities. We used a state-of-the-art deep learning method for medical entity extraction to
identify medical symptoms on Twitter in relation to COVID-19 [Scepanovic et al., 2020]. When applied to tweets,
the method extracts n-grams representing medical symptoms (e.g., “feeling sick”). This method is based on the
Bi-LSTM sequence-tagging architecture [Huang et al., 2015] in combination with GloVe word embeddings [Pennington et al., 2014] and RoBERTa contextual embeddings [Liu et al., 2019]. To optimize the entity extraction
performance on noisy textual data from social media, we trained its sequence-tagging architecture on the Micromed
database [Jimeno-Yepes et al., 2015], a collection of tweets manually labeled with medical entities. The hyperparameters we used are: 256 hidden units, a batch size of 4, and a learning rate of 0.1 which we gradually halved
whenever there was no performance improvement after 3 epochs. We trained for a maximum of 200 epochs or
before the learning rate became too small (≤ .0001). The final model achieved an F1-score of .72 on Micromed.
The F1-score is a performance measure that combines precision (the fraction of extracted entities that are actually
medical entities) and recall (the fraction of medical entities present in the text that the method is able to retrieve).
We based our implementation on Flair [Akbik et al., 2019] and Pytorch [Paszke et al., 2017], two popular deep
learning libraries in Python.
For each unique medical entity e, we counted the number of users Ue(t) who posted at least one tweet at time t
that mentioned that entity. We then obtained the fraction of users who mentioned medical entity e by dividing
Ue(t) by the total number of users U(t) who tweeted at time t:
(6) fe(t) = Ue(t)
U(t)
.
Last, we min-max normalize these fractions, considering the minimum and maximum values during the whole time
period [0, T]:
(7) fe(t) = fe(t) − min[0,T](fe)
max[0,T](fe) − min[0,T](fe)
.
Mobility traces. Foursquare is a local search and discovery mobile application that relies on the users’ past mobility
records to recommend places user might may like. The application uses GPS geo-localization to estimate the
user position and to infer the places they visited. In response to the COVID-19 crisis, Foursquare made publicly
available the data gathered from a pool of 13 million U.S. users. These users were “always-on” during the period of
data collection, meaning that they allowed the application to gather geo-location data at all times, even when the
application was not in use. The data (published through the visitdata.org website) consists of the daily number
of users vs,j visiting any venue of type j in state s, starting from February 1st to the present day (e.g., 419,256
users visited schools in Indiana on February 1st). Overall, 35 distinct location categories were provided. To obtain
country-wide temporal indicators, we first applied a min-max normalization to the vs,j values:
(8) vs,j (t) = vs,j (t) − min[0,T](vs,j )
max[0,T](vs,j ) − min[0,T](vs,j )
.
We then averaged the values across all states:
(9) vj (t) = 1
S
X
s
vs,j (t),
where S is the total number of states. By weighting each state equally, we obtained a measure that is more
representative of the whole U.S. territory, rather than being biased towards high-density regions.HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 7
Time series smoothing. All our temporal indicators are affected by large day-to-day fluctuations. To extract
more consistent trends out of our time series, we applied a smoothing function—a common practice when analyzing
temporal data extracted from social media [O’Connor et al., 2010]. Given a time-varying signal x(t), we apply a
“boxcar” moving average over a window of the previous k days:
(10) x
∗
(t) =
Pt
i=t−k
x(i)
k
;
We selected a window of one week (k = 7). Weekly time windows are typically used to smooth out both day-to-day
variations as well as weekly periodicities [O’Connor et al., 2010]. We applied the smoothing to all the time series:
the language categories (z
∗
c
(t)), the mentions of medical entities (f
∗
e
(t)), the interaction types (f
∗
i
(t)), and the
foursquare visits (v
∗
j
(t)).
Change-point detection. To identify phases characterized by different combinations of the language categories,
we identified change-points—periods in which the values of all categories varied considerably at once. To quantify
such variations, for each language category c, we computed ∇(z
∗
c
(t)), namely the daily average squared gradient [L¨utkepohl, 2005] of the smoothed standardized fractions of that category. To calculate the gradient, we used
the Python function numpy.gradient. The gradient provides a measure of the rate of increase or decrease of the
signal; we consider the absolute value of the gradient, to account for the magnitude of change rather than the direction of change. To identify periods of consistent change as opposed to quick instantaneous shifts, we apply temporal
smoothing (Equation. 10) also to the time-series of gradients, and we denote the smoothed squared gradients with
∇∗
. Last, we average the gradients of all language categories to obtain the overall gradient over time:
(11) ∇(t) = 1
D
X
d
∇∗
(z
∗
c
(t)).
Peaks in the time series ∇(t) represent the days of highest variation, and we marked them as change-points. Using
the Python function scipy.signal.find peaks, we identified peaks as the local maxima whose values is higher
than the average plus two standard deviations, as it is common practice [Palshikar et al., 2009].
Results
Language use until the first contagion wave. During the first wave, U.S. residents experienced what the
pandemic entailed for the first time, and did so by going through an entire life-cycle, making this contagion wave
self-contained: arrival of an unknown virus, skepticism, isolation measures, full lock-down, and first reopening.
Figure 1 (A-C) shows how the standardized fractions of all the language categories as per Formula (2) changed from
February 1st to April 15th, the day in which restrictions in most states were lifted. The cell color encodes values
higher than the average in red, and lower in blue. We partitioned the language categories according to the three
psycho-social epidemics. Figure 1 D shows the value of the average squared gradient over time (as per Formula 11);
peaks in the curve represent the days of high local variation. We marked the peaks above two standard deviations
from the mean as change-points. We found two change-points that coincide with two key events: February 27th
,
the day of the announcement of the first infection in the country; and March 24th, the day of the announcement
of the ‘stay at home’ orders. These change-points identify three phases, which are described next by dwelling on
the peaks of the different language categories (days when their standardized fractions reached the maximum) and
reporting the percentage increase at peak (the increase is compared to the average from February 1st to April 15th
,
and its peak is denoted by ‘max peak’ in Table 1). The first phase (refusal phase) was characterized by anxiety
and fear. Death was frequently mentioned, with a peak on February 11 of +45% compared to its average during
the whole time period. The pronoun they was used in this temporal state more than average; this suggests that
the focus of discussion was on the implications of the viral epidemic on ‘others’, as this was when no infection had
been discovered in the U.S. yet. All other language categories exhibited no significant variations, which reflected
an overall situation of ‘business-as-usual.’
The second phase (anger phase) began on February 27th with an outburst of negative emotions (predominantly
anger ), right after the first COVID-19 contagion in the U.S. was announced. The abstract fear of death was replaced
by expressions of concrete health concerns, such as words expressing risk, and mentions of how body parts did feel.
On March 13th, the federal government announced the state of national emergency, followed by the enforcement
of state-level ‘stay at home’ orders. During those days, we observed a sharp increase of the use of the pronoun I
and of swear words (with a peak of +54% on March 18th), which hints at a climate of discussion characterized by
conflict and polarization. At the same time, we observed an increase in the use of words related to the daily habits
affected by the impending restriction policies, such as motion, social activities, and leisure. The mentions of words8 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
fear
death
anxiety
negemo
anger
swear
tentative
negate
body
feel
religion
posemo
sadness
trust
Fear
Refusal phase Anger phase Acceptance phase
A
they
risk
differ
I
we
affiliation
authority
power
care
prosocial
Morality
they-focus I-focus we-focus
B
motion
home
social
leisure
Action
work
as usual at home beyond home
C
Avg.
gradient
D
0.0
0.5
1.0
Custom words
E
Alcohol Exercising Economic
0.0
0.5
1.0
Interactions
F
Support Power Conflict
0.0
0.5
1.0
Medical
G
Physical health Mental health
2020-02-01
0.0
0.5
1.0
Mobility
Feb 27
first case
Mar 24
stay at home
H
Grocery Travel & Transport Outdoors & Recreation
−2
0
2
2020-02-15 2020-03-01 2020-03-15 2020-04-01 2020-04-15
Figure 1. The Epidemic Psychology on Twitter during the first contagion wave. (A-C) evolution of the use
of different language categories over time in tweets related to COVID-19. Each row in the heatmaps represents
a language category (e.g., words expressing anxiety) that our manual coding associated with one of the three
psycho-social epidemics. The cell color represents the daily standardized fraction of people who used words related
to that category: values that are higher than the average are red and those that are lower are blue. Categories are
partitioned in three groups according to the type of psycho-social epidemics they model: Fear, Morality, and Action.
(D) average gradient (i.e., instantaneous variation) of all the language categories; the peaks of gradient identify
change-points—dates around which a considerable change in the use of multiple language categories happened at
once. The dashed vertical lines that cross all the plots represent these change-points. (E-H) temporal evolution of
four families of indicators we used to corroborate the validity of the trends identified by the language categories.
We checked internal validity by comparing the language categories with a custom keyword-search approach and
two deep-learning NLP tools that extract types of social interactions and mentions of medical symptoms. We
checked external validity by looking at mobility patterns in different venue categories as estimated by the GPS
geo-localization service of the Foursquare mobile app. The timeline at the bottom of the figure marks some of the
key events of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S. such as the announcements of the first infection of COVID-19
recorded.HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 9
related to home peaked on March 16th (+38%), the day when the federal government announced social distancing
guidelines to be in place for at least two weeks.
The third phase (acceptance phase) started on March 24th, the day after the first physical-distancing measures were
imposed by law. The increased use of words of power and authority likely reflected the emergence of discussion
around the new policies enforced by government officials and public agencies. As the death toll raised steadily—
hitting the mark of 1,000 deaths on March 26th—expressions of conflict faded away, and words of sadness became
predominant. In those days of hardship, a sentiment of care for others and expressions of prosocial behavior became
more frequent (+19% and +25%, respectively). Last, mentions of work-related activities peaked as many people
either lost their job, or were compelled to work from home as result of the lockdown.
Thematic analysis. The language categories capture broad concepts related to Strong’s epidemic psychology
theory, but they do not allow for an analysis of the fine-grained topics within each category. To study them,
for each of the 87 combinations of language category and phase (29 language categories, for 3 phases), we listed
the 100 most retweeted tweets (e.g., most popular tweets containing anxiety posted in the refusal phase). To
identify overarching themes, we followed two steps that are commonly adopted in thematic analysis [Braun and
Clarke, 2006, Smith and Shinebourne, 2012]. We first applied open coding to identify key concepts that emerged
across multiple tweets; specifically, one of the authors read all the tweets and marked them with keywords that
reflected the key concepts expressed in the text. We then used axial coding to identify relationships between the
most frequent keywords to summarize them in semantically cohesive themes. Themes were reviewed in a recursive
manner rather than linear, by re-evaluating and adjusting them as new tweets were parsed. Table 2 summarizes
the most recurring themes, together with some of their representative tweets. In the refusal phase, statements of
skepticism were re-tweeted widely (Table 2, row 1). The epidemic was frequently depicted as a “foreign” problem
(r. 2) and all activities kept business as usual (r. 3).
In the anger phase, the discussion was characterized by outrage against three main categories: foreigners—especially
Chinese individuals, as Supplementary Materials detail—(r. 4), political opponents (r. 5), and people who adopted
different behavioral responses to the outbreak (r. 6). This level of conflict corroborates Strong’s postulate of the
“war against each other”. Science and religion were two prominent topics of discussion. A lively debate raged
around the validity of scientists’ recommendations (r. 7). Some social groups put their hopes on God rather than
on science (r. 8). Mentions of people self-isolating at home became very frequent, and highlighted the contrast
between judicious individuals and careless crowds (r. 9).
Finally, during the acceptance phase, the outburst of anger gave in to the sorrow caused by the mourning of
thousands of people (r. 10). By accepting the real threat of the virus, our Twitter users were more open to find
collective solutions to the problem and overcome fear with hope (r. 11). Although the positive attitude towards
the authorities seemed prevalent, some users expressed disappointment against the restrictions imposed (r. 12).
Those who were isolated at home started imagining a life beyond the isolation, especially in relation to reopening
businesses (r. 13).
Comparison with other behavioral markers. To assess the validity of our approach, we compared the previous
results with the output of alternative text-mining techniques applied to the same data (internal validity), and with
real-world mobility traces (external validity).
Comparison with other text mining techniques. We processed the very same social media posts with three alternative
text-mining techniques (Figure 1 E-G). In Table 4, we reported the three language categories with the strongest
correlations with each behavioral marker.
First, to allow for interpretable and explainable results, we applied a simple word-matching method that relies on
a custom lexicon containing three categories of words reflecting consumption of alcohol, physical exercising, and
economic concerns, as those aspects have been found to characterize the COVID-19 pandemic [The Economist,
2020]. We measured the daily fraction of users mentioning words in each of those categories (Figure 1 E). In the
refusal phase, the frequency of any of these words did not significantly increase. In the anger phase, the frequency
of words related to economy peaked, and that related to alcohol consumption peaked shortly after that. Table 4
shows that economy-related words were highly correlated with the use of anxiety words (r = 0.73), which is in
line with studies indicating that the degree of apprehension for the declining economy was comparable to that of
health-hazard concerns [Fetzer et al., 2020, Bareket-Bojmel et al., 2020]. Words of alcohol consumption were most
correlated with the language dimensions of body (r = 0.70), feel (r = 0.62), home (r = 0.58); in the period were
health concerns were at their peak, home isolation caused a rising tide of alcohol use [Da et al., 2020, Finlay and
Gilmore, 2020]. Finally, in the acceptance phase, the frequency of words related to physical exercise was significant;10 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
Theme Example tweets
The refusal phase
1 denial “Less than 2% of all cases result in death. Approximately equivalent to seasonal flu. Relax
people.”
2 they-focus “We will continue to call it the #WuhanVirus, which is exactly what it is.”
3 business as usual “Agriculture specialists at Dulles airport continue to protect our nation’s vital agricultural
resources.”
The anger phase
4 anger vs. foreigners
“Is there anything you won’t use to stir up hatred against the foreigner? #COVID19 is a
global pandemic.”
5 anger vs. political
opponents
“A new level of sickness has entered the body politic. The son of the monster mouthing off
grotesque lies about Dems cheering #coronavirus and Wall Street crashing because we want
an end to his father’s winning streak.”
6 anger vs. each
other
“Coronavirus or not, if you are ill, stay the f**k home. You’re not a hero for going to work
when you are unwell.”
7 science debate “When it comes to how to fight #CoronavirusPandemic, I’m making my decisions based on
healthcare professionals like Dr. Fauci and others, not political punditry”
8 religion “no problem is too big for God to handle [...] with God’s help, we will overcome this threat.”
9 I-focus, home “People get upset and annoyed at me when I tweet about the coronavirus, when I urge people
to stay in and avoid crowds”, “I am in the high risk category for coronavirus so do me a
favor [...] beg others to stay at home”
The acceptance phase
10 sadness “We deeply mourn the 758 New Yorkers we lost yesterday to COVID-19. New York is not
numb. We know this is not just a number—it is real lives lost forever.”
11 we-focus, hope “We are thankful for Japan’s friendship and cooperation as we stand together to defeat
the #COVID19 pandemic.”, “During tough times, real friends stick together. The U.S. is
thankful to #Taiwan for donating 2 million face masks to support our healthcare ”, “Now
more than ever, we need to choose hope over fear. We will beat COVID-19. We will overcome
this. Together.”
12 authority “You can’t go to church, buy seeds or paint, operate your business, run on a beach, or take
your kids to the park. You do have to obey all new ‘laws’, wear face masks in public, pay
your taxes. Hopefully this is over by the 4th of July so we can celebrate our freedom.
13 resuming work “We need to help as many working families and small businesses as possible. Workers who
have lost their jobs or seen their hours slashed and families who are struggling to pay rent
and put food on the table need help immediately. There’s no time to waste.”
Table 2. Recurring themes in the three phases, found by the means of thematic analysis of tweets. Themes are
paired with examples of popular tweets.
this happened at the same time when the use of positive words expressing togetherness was at its highest—affiliation
(r = 0.95), posemo (r = 0.93), we (r = 0.92). All these results match our previous interpretations of the peaks for
our language categories.
Second, since it is unclear whether a simple word count approach is effective in studying how the three psychosocial epidemics unfolded over time, we additionally applied the deep-learning approach that extracts mentions of
expressions of conflict, social support, and power. Figure 1 F shows the min-max normalized scores of the fraction
of users posting tweets labeled with each of these three interaction types (as per Formula 5). In the refusal phase,
conflict increased—this is when anxiety and blaming foreigners were recurring themes in Twitter. In the anger
phase, conflict peaked (similar to anxiety words, r = 0.88), yet, since the first lock-down measures were announced,
initial expressions of power and of social support gradually increased as well. Finally, in the acceptance phase,
social support peaked. Support was most correlated with the categories of affiliation (r = 0.98), positive emotions
(r = 0.96), and we (r = 0.94) (Table 4); power was most correlated with prosocial (r = 0.95), care (r = 0.94), and
authority (r = 0.94). Again, our previous interpretations concerning the existence of a phase of conflict followed by a
phase of social support were further confirmed by the deep-learning tool, which, as opposed to our dictionary-based
approaches, does not rely on word matching.HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 11
Phase Top positive Top negative
Refusal death (0.66) they (0.06) fear (0.04) I (-1.51) we (-1.27) home (-1.22)
Anger swear (2.17) feel (1.51) anxiety (1.46) death (-0.70) sadness (-0.51) prosocial (-0.38)
Acceptance sad (1.35) affiliation (1.19) prosocial (1.17) anxiety (-1.62) swear (-1.36) I (-0.34)
Table 3. Top three positive and bottom negative beta coefficients of the logistic regression models for the three
phases. The categories in bold are those included in our composite temporal score.
Third, we used the deep-learning tool that extracts mentions of medical entities from text [Scepanovic et al., 2020].
Out of all the entities extracted, we focused on the 100 most frequently mentioned and grouped them into two
families of symptoms, respectively, those related to physical health (e.g., “fever”, “cough”, “sick”) and those related
to mental health (e.g., “depression”, “stress”) [Brooks et al., 2020]. The min-max normalized fractions of users
posting tweets containing mentions of these symptoms (as per Formula 7) are shown in Figure 1 G. In refusal phase,
the frequency of symptom mentions did not change. In the anger phase, instead, physical symptoms started to be
mentioned, and they were correlated with the language categories expressing panic and physical health concerns—
swear (r = 0.83), feel (r = 0.77), and negate (r = 0.67). In the acceptance phase, mentions of mental symptoms
became most frequent. Interestingly, mental symptoms peaked when the Twitter discourse was characterized by
positive feelings and prosocial interactions—affiliation (r = 0.91), we (r = 0.88), and posemo (r = 0.85); this is
in line with recent studies that found that the psychological toll of COVID-19 has similar traits to post-traumatic
stress disorders and its symptoms might lag several weeks from the period of initial panic and forced isolation [Galea
et al., 2020, Liang et al., 2020, Dutheil et al., 2020].
Comparison with mobility traces. To test for the external validity of our language categories, we compared their
temporal trends with the mobility data from Foursquare. We picked three venue categories: Grocery shops, Travel
& Transport, and Outdoors & Recreation to reflect three different types of fundamental human needs [Maslow,
1943]: the primary need of getting food supplies, the secondary need of moving around freely (or to limit mobility
for safety), and the higher-level need of being entertained. In Figure 1 H, we show the min-max normalized number
of visits over time (as per Formula 9). The periods of higher variations of the normalized number of visits match the
transitions between the three phases. In the refusal phase, mobility patterns did not change. In the anger phase,
instead, travel started to drop, and grocery shopping peaked, supporting the interpretation of a phase characterized
by a wave of panic-induced stockpiling and a compulsion to save oneself—it co-occurred with the peak of use of
the pronoun I (r = 0.80)—rather than helping others. Finally, in the acceptance phase, the panic around grocery
shopping faded away, and the number of visits to parks and outdoor spaces increased.
Embedding epidemic psychology in real-time models. To embed our operationalization of epidemic psychology into real-time models (e.g., epidemiological models, urban mobility models), our measures need to work at
any point in time during a new pandemic; yet, given their current definitions, they do not: that is because they are
normalized values over the whole period of study (Figure 1 A-C). To fix that, we designed a new composite measure
that does not rely on full temporal knowledge, and a corresponding detection method that determines which of the
three phases one is in at any given point in time.
First, for each language category c, we computed the average value of fc (as per Formula 1) during the first day of
the epidemic, specifically µ[0,1](fc). During the first day, 86k users tweeted. We experimented with longer periods
(up to a week and 0.4M users), and obtained qualitatively similar results. We used the averages computed on this
initial period as reference values for later measurements. The assumption behind this approach is that the modeler
would know the set of relevant hashtags in the initial stages of the pandemic, which is reasonable considering that
this was the case for all the major pandemics occurred in the last decade [Fu et al., 2016, Oyeyemi et al., 2014,
Chew and Eysenbach, 2010]. Starting from the second day, we then calculated the percent change of the fc values
compared to the reference values:
(12) ∆%c(t) = fc(t) − µ[0,1](fc)
µ[0,1](fc)
.
For each phase, we defined a parsimonious measure composed only of two dimensions: the dimension most positively
associated with the phase (expressed in percent change) minus that most negatively associated with it (e.g., (death
- I) for the refusal phase). To identify such dimensions, we trained three logistic regression binary classifiers (one
per phase). For each phase, we marked with label 1 all the days that were included in that phase and with 0 those
that were not. Then, we trained a classifier to estimate the probability Pphasei
(t) that day t belongs to phase i, out12 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
Correlation with phases
Marker Most correlated language categories Refusal Anger Acceptance
Custom words
Alcohol body (0.70) feel (0.62) home (0.58) -0.43 0.46 -0.12
Economic anxiety (0.73) negemo (0.68) negate (0.56) -0.12 0.37 -0.53
Exercising affiliation (0.95) posemo (0.93) we (0.92) -0.62 0.31 0.89
Interactions
Conflict anxiety (0.88) death (0.57) negemo (0.54) 0.58 -0.24 -0.92
Support affiliation (0.98) posemo (0.96) we (0.94) -0.68 0.37 0.90
Power prosocial (0.95) care (0.94) authority (0.94) -0.48 0.18 0.88
Medical
Physical health swear (0.83) feel (0.77) negate (0.67) -0.66 0.81 -0.32
Mental health affiliation (0.91) we (0.88) posemo (0.85) -0.65 0.36 0.85
Mobility
Travel death (0.59) anxiety (0.58) 0.62 -0.32 -0.82
Grocery I (0.80) leisure (0.72) home (0.64) -0.77 0.70 0.29
Outdoors sad (0.68) posemo (0.65) affiliation (0.59) -0.62 0.39 0.72
Table 4. (Left) Correlation of our language categories with behavioral markers computed with alternative techniques and datasets. For each marker, the three categories with strongest correlations are reported, together with
their Pearson correlation values in parenthesis. (Right) Pearson correlation between values for our behavioral
markers and “being” in a given phase or not. Values in bold indicate the highest values for each marker across
the three phases. All reported correlations are statistically significant (p < 0.01).
of the ∆%c(t) values for all categories. During training, the logistic regression learned coefficients for each of the
categories. On average, the classifiers were able to identify the correct phase for 98% of the days.
The regressions coefficients were then used to rank the language category by their predictive power. Table 3 shows
the top three positive beta coefficients and bottom three negative ones for each of the three phases. The top
and bottom categories of all phases belong to the LIWC lexicon. For each phase, we subtracted the top category
from the bottom category without considering their beta coefficients, as these would require, again, full temporal
knowledge:
∆%Refusal = ∆%death − ∆%I
∆%Anger = ∆%swear − ∆%death
∆%Acceptance = ∆%sad − ∆%anxiety
(13)
The resulting composite measure has the same change-points (Figure 3A) as the full-knowledge measure’s (Figure 1),
suggesting that the real-time and parsimonious computation does not compromise the original trends. In a real-time
scenario, transition between phases are captured by the changes of the dominant measure; for example, when the
refusal curve is overtaken by the anger curve. In addition, we correlated the composite measures with each of the
behavioral markers we used for validation (Figure 1 E-H) to find which are the markers most typically associated
with each of the phases. We reported the correlations in Table 4. During the refusal phase, conflictual interactions
were frequent (r = 0.58) and long-range mobility was common (r = 0.62); during the anger phase, as mobility
reduced [Engle et al., 2020, Gao et al., 2020], some people hoarded groceries and alcohol [Da et al., 2020, Finlay and
Gilmore, 2020] and expressed concerns for their physical health (r = 0.81) and for the economy [Fetzer et al., 2020,
Bareket-Bojmel et al., 2020]; last, during the acceptance phase, some people ventured outdoors, started exercising
more, and expressed a stronger will to support each other (r = 0.90), in the wake of a rising tide of deaths and
mental health symptoms (r = 0.85) [Galea et al., 2020, Liang et al., 2020, Dutheil et al., 2020].
Language use after the first contagion wave. After the first wave and the “stay-at-home” lock-down at the
end of March, for the remaining part of the year, there were two other contagion waves (Figure 2A): one at the
beginning of June, and the other at the beginning of October. In a way similar to the first wave, these two othersHOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 13
0
250
500
Cases per million
A
1st wave 2nd wave 3rd wave
2020-02 2020-03 2020-04 2020-05 2020-06 2020-07 2020-08 2020-09 2020-10 2020-11 2020-12
0.0
0.5
1.0
Avg. gradient
B
Feb 27th
Mar 24th
May 27th
Jun 9th
Oct 2nd
Figure 2. The number of recorded infections in the U.S. (A), and the average gradient (i.e., instantaneous
variation) of all the language categories (B). There were three contagion waves in the year (shaded areas in A)
and, for each wave, there were peaks in the gradient (marked with circles in B), which identify change-points, that
is, periods in which the use of language considerably changed.
2020-02-01 2020-02-15 2020-03-01 2020-03-15 2020-04-01 2020-04-15
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
Δ%
First case
Stay at home
A
Refusal Anger Acceptance
2020-02 2020-03 2020-04 2020-05 2020-06 2020-07 2020-08 2020-09 2020-10 2020-11 2020-12
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Δ%
First case
Stay at home
100k deaths
Trump positive
B
Refusal Anger Acceptance
Figure 3. The evolution of the language categories associated with refusal, of those associated with anger, and
of those associated with acceptance, zooming out from the first contagion wave (A) to the three waves during the
entire 2020 (B).
were both associated with significant changes in the use of language (Figure 2B): we had two change peaks for the
second wave (i.e., May 27th and June 9th), and one for the third (October 2). This comes at no surprise as these two
periods corresponded to two widely discussed events: the first 100K deaths in the U.S., and President Donald Trump
testing positive for COVID-19. In particular, Figure 3B shows that these changes were both to do with the rumping
up of the categories associated with the anger phase: discussions of changes in mobility, and posts characterized
by anger and, more generally, by negative emotions were predominant. By contrast, the categories associated with
refusal and acceptance diverged from each other: unsurprisingly, throughout the year, refusal gradually died off,
while acceptance increasingly took hold. Overall, we observed two classes of pattern (Figure 3B). First, the three
phases were not always orthogonal but blended together at times. During the second contagion wave, for example,
anger and acceptance were both predominant, and had been so for several months. Second, the use of language
had a cyclical nature. During each contagion wave, three consecutive local peaks (local maxima) were observed:
refusal first, then anger, finally acceptance. This can be observed for all the three contagion waves. Such a cyclical
nature was also reflected in our behavioral markers (Figure 4(E-H)). For each wave, mentions of conflict peaked to
then be followed by mentions of support and power (Figure 4F). The same went for medical conditions: mentions
of physical health peaked to then be followed by mentions of mental health (Figure 4G).14 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
0
250
500
Cases
per million
First
case
Stay
at home
100k
deaths
Trump
positive
1st wave 2nd wave 3rd wave
fear
death
anxiety
negemo
anger
swear
tentative
negate
body
feel
religion
posemo
sadness
trust
Fear
A
they
risk
differ
I
we
affiliation
authority
power
care
prosocial
Morality
B
motion
home
social
leisure
Action
work
C
Avg.
gradient
D
0.0
0.5
1.0
Custom words
E
Alcohol Exercising Economic
0.0
0.5
1.0
Interactions
F
Support Power Conflict
0.0
0.5
1.0
Medical
G
Physical health Mental health
2020-02 2020-03 2020-04 2020-05 2020-06 2020-07 2020-08 2020-09 2020-10 2020-11 2020-12
0.0
0.5
1.0
Mobility
H
Grocery Travel & Transport Outdoors & Recreation
−2
0
2
4
Figure 4. The Epidemic Psychology on Twitter during the three contagion waves (shown in the top most panel)
during the entire year of 2020. (A-H) temporally expands (A-H) in Figure 1 with the only difference that the
heatmaps in (A-C) here show values that were standardized using the mean and standard deviation calculated on
the whole period of study, from February 1st to December 31st
.
Discussion
Findings beyond Strong’s model. Strong’s theory offers a framework upon which to operationalize the three
psycho-social epidemics from the use of language but does not specifically describe how these epidemics unfold.
Based on our data-driven results, we confirmed that the three epidemics are indeed present in our social conversations
spanning almost one year, and they unfolded in ways that allowed us to enrich what Strong initially hypothesized
in relation to four main aspects.
First, Strong’s theory predicts the presence of the three psycho-social epidemics but does not describe how they
would be related to each other over time. We found that the three epidemics, as expressed by the relative presence
of their relevant language categories, simultaneously raised and fell over time, and did so in relation to one another,
demarcating three specific temporal phases. Over time, we identified three specific combinations of the epidemics
that generated three phases our Twitter users went through: an initial refusal phase, an anger phase, and a final
acceptance phase. Since these temporal phases partly resemble the stages of grief by K¨ubler-Ross et al. [1972], a
promising direction for future work is to explore the relationship between these phases and the stages of grief.HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 15
Second, Strong’s narration slightly hints at a typical sequence of events according to which the epidemic of fear
activates before that of morality, which is then followed by that of action. We indeed observed a similar set of
events yet these events were not strictly sequential but rather cyclical. Interestingly, every new cycle started in
conjunction with the same specific event: the diffusion rate of the virus reaching a local maximum. Shortly after
every sharp increase in the diffusion rate, a cycle of refusal, anger, and acceptance unfolded among our Twitter
users.
Third, Strong’s framework does not make any explicit distinction between the initial stages of an epidemic and its
final stages. We found two regimes that considerably separated the initial stages from the later stages: in the initial
cycle, the variation of the three epidemics was of a larger magnitude than those in the two subsequent cycles.
Last, Strong’s theory should be used as a descriptive framework and, as such, cannot be used to explore short-term
variations. By contrast, a data-driven experimental work such as ours is able to point out when such variations
potentially took place, as Figure 4 shows. In future work, these points of change could be subject to qualitative
inquiry, which might well enrich the original formulation of the theory.
Implications. New infectious diseases break out abruptly, and public health agencies try to rely on detailed
planning yet often find themselves to improvise around their playbook. They are constantly confronting not only
the health epidemic but also the three psycho-social epidemics. Measuring the effects of epidemics on societal
dynamics and population mental health has been an open research problem for a long time, and multidisciplinary
approaches have been called for [Holmes et al., 2020]. We contributed to this line of research by operationalizing
Strong’s model and successfully testing it on Twitter in the U.S.. Since our methodology can be applied to any
textual data, future work may well study alternative (even cross-cultural) population segments. Since our language
categories are not tailored to a specific epidemic (e.g., they do not reflect any specific symptom an epidemic is
associated with), our approach can be applied to a future epidemic, provided that the set of relevant hashtags
associated with the epidemic is known; this is a reasonable assumption to make though, considering that the
consensus on Twitter hashtags is reached quickly [Baronchelli, 2018], and that several epidemics that occurred in
the last decade sparked discussions on Twitter since their early days [Fu et al., 2016, Oyeyemi et al., 2014, Chew
and Eysenbach, 2010].
Our method complements the numerous cross-sectional studies on the psychological impact of health epidemics
conducted on representative population samples [Shultz et al., 2015, Brooks et al., 2020], not least because it
collects real-time statistics of implicit behavioral signals, which are orthogonal to survey responses.
For computer science researchers, our method could provide a starting point for developing more sophisticated
tools for monitoring psycho-social epidemics. Furthermore, from the theoretical standpoint, our work provides the
first operationalization of Strong’s model of the epidemic psychology, and widens its theoretical implications by
observing cyclical phases of diffusion of the psycho-social epidemics.
Finally, the ability to systematically characterize the three psycho-social epidemics from the use of language on
social media makes it possible to embed epidemic psychology into models currently used to tackle epidemics such as
mobility models [Bansal et al., 2016]. To see how, consider that, in digital epidemiology [Salathe et al., 2012, Bauch
and Galvani, 2013], some parameters of epidemic models are initialized or adjusted based on a variety of digital
data to account for co-determinants of the spreading process that are hard to quantify with traditional data sources,
especially in the first stages of the outbreak. This is particularly useful when modeling social and psychological
processes such as risk perception [Bagnoli et al., 2007, Moinet et al., 2018]. Interestingly, these approaches are
designed to deal with partial data, therefore they can benefit even from digital data that is incomplete and—like in
the case of our Twitter-based study—not necessarily representative of the whole population [Salathe et al., 2012].
Limitations. Future work could improve our work in five main aspects. First, we focused only on one viral
epidemic, without being able to compare it to others. Yet, if one were to obtain past social media data during
the outbreaks of diseases like Zika [Fu et al., 2016], Ebola [Oyeyemi et al., 2014], and the H1N1 influenza [Chew
and Eysenbach, 2010], one could apply our methodology in those contexts as well, and identify similarities and
differences. For example, one could study how mortality rates or speed of spreading influence the representation of
Strong’s epidemic psychology on social media.
Second, our geographical focus was the entire United States and, as such, was coarse and limited in scope. In
Supplementary Materials, we broke-down the analysis of temporal phases for individual states in the U.S., and
observed no substantial differences across states. In the future, one could conduct a more systematic analysis on
a finer geographical granularity, relate differences between states to known events (e.g., a governor’s decisions,16 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
prevalence of cases, media landscape, and residents’ cultural traits). In particular, recent studies suggested that
the public reaction to COVID-19 varied across the U.S. states depending on their political leaning [Painter and
Qiu, 2020, Grossman et al., 2020]. One could also apply our methodology to other English-speaking countries, to
investigate how cultural dimensions [Hofstede et al., 2005] and cross-cultural personality trait variations [Bleidorn
et al., 2013] might influence the three psycho-social epidemics.
Third, the three psycho-social epidemics were not always orthogonal to each other but did blend together at times.
Future work could focus on those particular periods of time to determine whether the use either of finer-grained
categorizations of language or of event detection techniques other than our change-point detection [Aiello et al.,
2013] could disentangle those periods in theoretically meaningful ways.
Fourth, our study is limited to Twitter, mainly because Twitter is the largest open stream of real-time social media
data. The practice of using Twitter as a way of modeling the psychological state of a country carries its own
limitations. Despite having a rather high penetration in the U.S. (around 20% of adults, according to the latest
estimates [Perrin and Anderson]), its user base is not representative of the general population [Li et al., 2013].
Additionally, Twitter is notoriously populated by bots [Ferrara et al., 2016, Varol et al., 2017], automated accounts
that are often used to amplify specific topics or view points. Bots played an important role to steer the discussion
on several events of broad public interest [Bessi and Ferrara, 2016, Broniatowski et al., 2018], and it is reasonable to
expect that they have a role in COVID-related discussions too, as some studies seem to suggest [Yang et al., 2020].
To partly discount their impact, since they tend to have anomalous levels of activity (especially retweeting [Bessi
and Ferrara, 2016]), we performed two tests. First, we computed all our measures at user-level rather than tweetlevel, which counter anomalous levels of activity. Second, we replicated our temporal analysis excluding retweets,
and obtained very similar results. In the future, one could attempt to adapt our framework to different sources of
online data, for example to web search queries—which have proven useful to identify different phases of the public
reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic [Husnayain et al., 2020].
Last, as Strong himself acknowledged in his seminal paper: “any sharp separation between different types of epidemic
psychology is a dubious business.” Our work has operationalized each psycho-social epidemic independently. In the
future, modeling the relationships among the three epidemics might identify hitherto hidden emergent properties.
References
L. M. Aiello, G. Petkos, C. Martin, D. Corney, S. Papadopoulos, R. Skraba, A. G¨oker, I. Kompatsiaris and A.
Jaimes. Sensing trending topics in Twitter. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 15(6):1268–1282, 2013.
A. Akbik, T. Bergmann, D. Blythe, K. Rasul, S. Schweter, and R. Vollgraf. FLAIR: An easy-to-use framework for
state-of-the-art NLP. In Proceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 54–59, 2019.
G. W. Alpers, A. J. Winzelberg, C. Classen, H. Roberts, P. Dev, C. Koopman, and C. B. Taylor. Evaluation of
computerized text analysis in an internet breast cancer support group. Computers in Human Behavior, 21(2):
361–376, 2005.
J. Arguello, B. S. Butler, E. Joyce, R. Kraut, K. S. Ling, C. Ros´e, and X. Wang. Talk to me: foundations for
successful individual-group interactions in online communities. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human Factors in computing systems, pages 959–968, 2006.
F. Bagnoli, P. Lio, and L. Sguanci. Risk perception in epidemic modeling. Physical Review E, 76(6):061904, 2007.
S. Bansal, G. Chowell, L. Simonsen, A. Vespignani, and C. Viboud. Big data for infectious disease surveillance and
modeling. The Journal of infectious diseases, 214(suppl 4):S375–S379, 2016.
L. Bareket-Bojmel, G. Shahar, and M. Margalit. Covid-19-related economic anxiety is as high as health anxiety:
Findings from the usa, the uk, and israel. International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, page 1, 2020.
A. Baronchelli. The emergence of consensus: a primer. Royal Society open science, 5(2):172189, 2018.
C. T. Bauch and A. P. Galvani. Social factors in epidemiology. Science, 342(6154):47–49, 2013.
A. I. Bento, T. Nguyen, C. Wing, F. Lozano-Rojas, Y.-Y. Ahn, and K. Simon. Evidence from internet search data
shows information-seeking responses to news of local covid-19 cases. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 2020.HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 17
A. Bessi and E. Ferrara. Social bots distort the 2016 us presidential election online discussion. First Monday, 21
(11-7), 2016.
P. M. Blau. Exchange and Power in Social Life. Transaction Publishers, 1964.
W. Bleidorn, T. A. Klimstra, J. J. Denissen, P. J. Rentfrow, J. Potter, and S. D. Gosling. Personality maturation
around the world: A cross-cultural examination of social-investment theory. Psychological science, 24(12):2530–
2540, 2013.
J. L. Borelli and D. A. Sbarra. Trauma history and linguistic self-focus moderate the course of psychological
adjustment to divorce. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 30(7):667–698, 2011.
V. Braun and V. Clarke. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in psychology, 3(2):77–101,
2006.
D. A. Broniatowski, A. M. Jamison, S. Qi, L. AlKulaib, T. Chen, A. Benton, S. C. Quinn, and M. Dredze.
Weaponized health communication: Twitter bots and russian trolls amplify the vaccine debate. American journal
of public health, 108(10):1378–1384, 2018.
S. K. Brooks, R. K. Webster, L. E. Smith, L. Woodland, S. Wessely, N. Greenberg, and G. J. Rubin. The
psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid review of the evidence. The Lancet, 2020.
P. Cap. The language of fear: Communicating threat in public discourse. Springer, 2016.
E. Chen, K. Lerman, and E. Ferrara. Tracking social media discourse about the covid-19 pandemic: Development of
a public coronavirus twitter data set. JMIR Public Health Surveillance, 6(2):e19273, May 2020. ISSN 2369-2960.
doi: 10.2196/19273.
C. Chew and G. Eysenbach. Pandemics in the age of twitter: content analysis of tweets during the 2009 h1n1
outbreak. PloS one, 5(11), 2010.
M. Choi, L. M. Aiello, K. Z. Varga, and D. Quercia. Ten social dimensions of conversations and relationships. In
Proceedings of The Web Conference, WWW. ACM, 2020.
M. Cinelli, W. Quattrociocchi, A. Galeazzi, C. M. Valensise, E. Brugnoli, A. L. Schmidt, P. Zola, F. Zollo, and
A. Scala. The covid-19 social media infodemic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05004, 2020.
G. Coppersmith, M. Dredze, and C. Harman. Quantifying mental health signals in twitter. In Proceedings of the
workshop on computational linguistics and clinical psychology: From linguistic signal to clinical reality, pages
51–60, 2014.
B. L. Da, G. Y. Im, and T. D. Schiano. Covid-19 hangover: a rising tide of alcohol use disorder and alcohol-associated
liver disease. Hepatology, 2020.
S. Deri, J. Rappaz, L. M. Aiello, and D. Quercia. Coloring in the links: Capturing social ties as they are perceived.
In Proceedings of the ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, CSCW,
pages 1–18. ACM, 2018.
M. Deutsch. Trust and suspicion. Journal of conflict resolution, 2(4):265–279, 1958.
M. Dredze, M. J. Paul, S. Bergsma, and H. Tran. Carmen: A twitter geolocation system with applications to public
health. In Workshops at the Twenty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2013.
F. Dutheil, L. Mondillon, and V. Navel. Ptsd as the second tsunami of the sars-cov-2 pandemic. Psychological
Medicine, pages 1–2, 2020.
M. ElSherief, V. Kulkarni, D. Nguyen, W. Y. Wang, and E. Belding. Hate lingo: A target-based linguistic analysis
of hate speech in social media. In Twelfth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, 2018.
S. Engle, J. Stromme, and A. Zhou. Staying at home: mobility effects of covid-19. Available at SSRN, 2020.
E. Ferrara. #covid-19 on twitter: Bots, conspiracies, and social media activism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09531,
2020.
E. Ferrara, O. Varol, C. Davis, F. Menczer, and A. Flammini. The rise of social bots. Communications of the ACM,
59(7):96–104, 2016.18 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
T. Fetzer, L. Hensel, J. Hermle, and C. Roth. Coronavirus perceptions and economic anxiety. Review of Economics
and Statistics, pages 1–36, 2020.
L. Figea, L. Kaati, and R. Scrivens. Measuring online affects in a white supremacy forum. In 2016 IEEE conference
on intelligence and security informatics (ISI), pages 85–90. IEEE, 2016.
I. Finlay and I. Gilmore. Covid-19 and alcohol—a dangerous cocktail, 2020.
S. T. Fiske, A. J. Cuddy, and P. Glick. Universal Dimensions of Social Cognition: Warmth and Competence. Trends
in cognitive sciences, 11(2):77–83, 2007.
J. A. Frimer, N. K. Schaefer, and H. Oakes. Moral actor, selfish agent. Journal of personality and social psychology,
106(5):790, 2014.
K.-W. Fu, H. Liang, N. Saroha, Z. T. H. Tse, P. Ip, and I. C.-H. Fung. How people react to zika virus outbreaks
on twitter? a computational content analysis. American journal of infection control, 44(12):1700–1702, 2016.
S. Galea, R. M. Merchant, and N. Lurie. The mental health consequences of covid-19 and physical distancing: The
need for prevention and early intervention. JAMA internal medicine, 180(6):817–818, 2020.
S. Gao, J. Rao, Y. Kang, Y. Liang, and J. Kruse. Mapping county-level mobility pattern changes in the united
states in response to covid-19. SIGSPATIAL Special, 12(1):16–26, 2020.
G. R. Gibbs. Thematic coding and categorizing. Analyzing qualitative data. London: Sage, pages 38–56, 2007.
A. J. Gill, R. M. French, D. Gergle, and J. Oberlander. The language of emotion in short blog texts. In Proceedings
of the 2008 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work, pages 299–302, 2008.
E. Goffman. Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. Simon and Schuster, 2009.
M. C. Gonzalez, C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barabasi. Understanding individual human mobility patterns. nature,
453(7196):779–782, 2008.
J. Graham, J. Haidt, and B. A. Nosek. Liberals and conservatives rely on different sets of moral foundations.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 96(5):1029, 2009.
J. Graham, J. Haidt, S. Koleva, M. Motyl, R. Iyer, S. P. Wojcik, and P. H. Ditto. Moral foundations theory: The
pragmatic validity of moral pluralism. In Advances in experimental social psychology, volume 47, pages 55–130.
Elsevier, 2013.
G. Grossman, S. Kim, J. Rexer, and H. Thirumurthy. Political partisanship influences behavioral responses to
governors’ recommendations for covid-19 prevention in the united states. Available at SSRN 3578695, 2020.
J. R. Hebert, L. Clemow, L. Pbert, I. S. Ockene, J. K. Ockene. Social desirability bias in dietary self-report may
compromise the validity of dietary intake measures. International journal of epidemiology, 24(2):389–398, 1995.
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
G. H. Hofstede, G. J. Hofstede, and M. Minkov. Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind, volume 2.
Mcgraw-hill New York, 2005.
E. A. Holmes, R. C. O’Connor, V. H. Perry, I. Tracey, S. Wessely, L. Arseneault, C. Ballard, H. Christensen, R. C.
Silver, I. Everall, et al. Multidisciplinary research priorities for the covid-19 pandemic: a call for action for mental
health science. The Lancet Psychiatry, 2020.
Z. Hou, F. Du, H. Jiang, X. Zhou, and L. Lin. Assessment of public attention, risk perception, emotional and
behavioural responses to the covid-19 outbreak: social media surveillance in china. Risk Perception, Emotional
and Behavioural Responses to the COVID-19 Outbreak: Social Media Surveillance in China (3/6/2020), 2020.
Z. Huang, W. Xu, and K. Yu. Bidirectional lstm-crf models for sequence tagging. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.01991,
2015.
M. Hunt, J. Auriemma, A. Cashaw. Self-report bias and underreporting of depression on the BDI-II Journal of
personality assessment, 80(1):26–30, 2003.HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 19
A. Husnayain, A. Fuad, and E. C.-Y. Su. Applications of google search trends for risk communication in infectious
disease management: A case study of covid-19 outbreak in taiwan. International Journal of Infectious Diseases,
2020.
A. Jimeno-Yepes, A. MacKinlay, B. Han, and Q. Chen. Identifying diseases, drugs, and symptoms in twitter.
Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 216:643, 2015.
T. Johnson, M. Fendrich. Modeling sources of self-report bias in a survey of drug use epidemiology Annals of
epidemiology, 15(5):381–389, 2005.
J. H. Kahn, R. M. Tobin, A. E. Massey, and J. A. Anderson. Measuring emotional expression with the linguistic
inquiry and word count. The American journal of psychology, pages 263–286, 2007.
S. Khan and D. Huremovi´c. Psychology of the pandemic. In Psychiatry of Pandemics, pages 37–44. Springer, 2019.
R. Kornfield, C. L. Toma, D. V. Shah, T. J. Moon, and D. H. Gustafson. What do you say before you relapse? how
language use in a peer-to-peer online discussion forum predicts risky drinking among those in recovery. Health
communication, 33(9):1184–1193, 2018.
R. Kouzy, J. Abi Jaoude, A. Kraitem, M. B. El Alam, B. Karam, E. Adib, J. Zarka, C. Traboulsi, E. W. Akl, and
K. Baddour. Coronavirus goes viral: quantifying the covid-19 misinformation epidemic on twitter. Cureus, 12
(3), 2020.
E. K¨ubler-Ross, S. Wessler, and L. V. Avioli. On death and dying. Jama, 221(2):174–179, 1972.
L. Li, M. F. Goodchild, and B. Xu. Spatial, temporal, and socioeconomic patterns in the use of twitter and flickr.
Cartography and geographic information science, 40(2):61–77, 2013.
S. Li, Y. Wang, J. Xue, N. Zhao, and T. Zhu. The impact of covid-19 epidemic declaration on psychological
consequences: a study on active weibo users. International journal of environmental research and public health,
17(6):2032, 2020.
L. Liang, H. Ren, R. Cao, Y. Hu, Z. Qin, C. Li, and S. Mei. The effect of covid-19 on youth mental health.
Psychiatric Quarterly, pages 1–12, 2020.
Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and V. Stoyanov. Roberta:
A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
H. L¨utkepohl. New introduction to multiple time series analysis. Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
A. H. Maslow. A theory of human motivation. Psychological review, 50(4):370, 1943.
P. McConnell. Banks and avian flu: Planning for a possible pandemic. Risk Trading Technology, 2005.
S. M. Mohammad and P. D. Turney. Crowdsourcing a word–emotion association lexicon. Computational Intelligence,
29(3):436–465, 2013.
A. Moinet, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Barrat. Effect of risk perception on epidemic spreading in temporal networks.
Physical Review E, 97(1):012313, 2018.
B. O’Connor, R. Balasubramanyan, B. R. Routledge, and N. A. Smith. From tweets to polls: Linking text sentiment
to public opinion time series. In Fourth international AAAI conference on weblogs and social media, 2010.
S. O. Oyeyemi, E. Gabarron, and R. Wynn. Ebola, twitter, and misinformation: a dangerous combination? Bmj,
349:g6178, 2014.
M. Painter and T. Qiu. Political beliefs affect compliance with covid-19 social distancing orders. Available at SSRN
3569098, 2020.
G. Palshikar et al. Simple algorithms for peak detection in time-series. In Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Advanced Data
Analysis, Business Analytics and Intelligence, volume 122, 2009.
A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin, A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, and A. Lerer.
Automatic differentiation in PyTorch. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
Autodiff Workshop, 2017.20 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. Manning. GloVe: Global vectors for word representation. In Proceedings of the
conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 1532–1543. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2014.
A. Perrin and M. Anderson. Share of u.s. adults using social media, including facebook, is
mostly unchanged since 2018. URL https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/04/10/
share-of-u-s-adults-using-social-media-including-facebook-is-mostly-unchanged-since-2018/.
R. Plutchik. The emotions. University Press of America, 1991.
C. M. Pulido, B. Villarejo-Carballido, G. Redondo-Sama, and A. G´omez. Covid-19 infodemic: More retweets
for science-based information on coronavirus than for false information. International Sociology, page
0268580920914755, 2020.
J. Qiu, B. Shen, M. Zhao, Z. Wang, B. Xie, and Y. Xu. A nationwide survey of psychological distress among chinese
people in the covid-19 epidemic: implications and policy recommendations. General psychiatry, 33(2), 2020.
R. Rezapour, S. H. Shah, and J. Diesner. Enhancing the measurement of social effects by capturing morality. In
Proceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social Media
Analysis, pages 35–45, 2019.
M. A. Russell. Mining the social web: data mining Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Google+, GitHub, and more. ”
O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2013.
H. Saif, Y. He, and H. Alani. Alleviating data sparsity for twitter sentiment analysis. CEUR Workshop Proceedings
(CEUR-WS. org), 2012.
M. Salathe, L. Bengtsson, T. J. Bodnar, D. D. Brewer, J. S. Brownstein, C. Buckee, E. M. Campbell, C. Cattuto,
S. Khandelwal, P. L. Mabry, et al. Digital epidemiology. PLoS Comput Biol, 8(7):e1002616, 2012.
S. Scepanovic, E. Martin-Lopez, D. Quercia, and K. Baykaner. Extracting medical entities from social media. In
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, pages 170–181, 2020.
A. Schutz, T. Luckmann, R. Zaner, and J. Engelhardt. The Structures of the Life-world. Number v. 1 in Northwestern University studies in phenomenology & existential philosophy. Northwestern University Press, 1973. ISBN
9780810106222. URL https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=LGXBxI0Xsh8C.
B. Shaw, J. Y. Han, E. Kim, D. Gustafson, R. Hawkins, J. Cleary, F. McTavish, S. Pingree, P. Eliason, and
C. Lumpkins. Effects of prayer and religious expression within computer support groups on women with breast
cancer. Psycho-Oncology: Journal of the Psychological, Social and Behavioral Dimensions of Cancer, 16(7):
676–687, 2007.
J. H. Shen and F. Rudzicz. Detecting anxiety through reddit. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology—From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality, pages 58–65, 2017.
J. M. Shultz, F. Baingana, and Y. Neria. The 2014 ebola outbreak and mental health: current status and recommended response. Jama, 313(6):567–568, 2015.
T. Simms, C. Ramstedt, M. Rich, M. Richards, T. Martinez, and C. Giraud-Carrier. Detecting cognitive distortions
through machine learning text analytics. In 2017 IEEE international conference on healthcare informatics (ICHI),
pages 508–512. IEEE, 2017.
J. A. Smith and P. Shinebourne. Interpretative phenomenological analysis. American Psychological Association,
2012.
S. Sommariva, C. Vamos, A. Mantzarlis, L. U.-L. ¯D`ao, and D. Martinez Tyson. Spreading the (fake) news: exploring
health messages on social media and the implications for health professionals using a case study. American journal
of health education, 49(4):246–255, 2018.
P. Strong. Epidemic psychology: a model. Sociology of Health & Illness, 12(3):249–259, 1990.
H. Tajfel, J. C. Turner, W. G. Austin, and S. Worchel. An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. Organizational
Identity, 1979.
Y. R. Tausczik and J. W. Pennebaker. The psychological meaning of words: Liwc and computerized text analysis
methods. Journal of language and social psychology, 29(1):24–54, 2010.HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 21
The Economist. With millions stuck at home, the online wellness industry is booming. https://www.economist.com/international/2020/04/04/
with-millions-stuck-at-home-the-online-wellness-industry-is-booming.
J. J. Van Bavel, K. Baicker, P. S. Boggio, V. Capraro, A. Cichocka, M. Cikara, M. J. Crockett, A. J. Crum, K. M.
Douglas, J. N. Druckman, et al. Using social and behavioural science to support covid-19 pandemic response.
Nature Human Behaviour, pages 1–12, 2020.
O. Varol, E. Ferrara, C. A. Davis, F. Menczer, and A. Flammini. Online human-bot interactions: Detection,
estimation, and characterization. In Eleventh international AAAI conference on web and social media, 2017.
C. Wang, R. Pan, X. Wan, Y. Tan, L. Xu, C. S. Ho, and R. C. Ho. Immediate psychological responses and associated
factors during the initial stage of the 2019 coronavirus disease (covid-19) epidemic among the general population
in china. International journal of environmental research and public health, 17(5):1729, 2020.
S. F. Waterloo, S. E. Baumgartner, J. Peter, and P. M. Valkenburg. Norms of online expressions of emotion:
Comparing facebook, twitter, instagram, and whatsapp. new media & society, 20(5):1813–1831, 2018.
L. C. Windsor, N. Dowell, and A. Graesser. The language of autocrats: Leaders’ language in natural disaster crises.
Risk, Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy, 5(4):446–467, 2014.
S. Wojcik and A. Hughes. Sizing up twitter users. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, 2019.
M. Wolf, F. Theis, and H. Kordy. Language use in eating disorder blogs: Psychological implications of social online
activity. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 32(2):212–226, 2013.
M. J. Wood. Propagating and debunking conspiracy theories on twitter during the 2015–2016 zika virus outbreak.
Cyberpsychology, behavior, and social networking, 21(8):485–490, 2018.
K.-C. Yang, C. Torres-Lugo, and F. Menczer. Prevalence of low-credibility information on twitter during the
covid-19 outbreak. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14484, 2020.
Acknowledgments
We thank Sarah Konrath, Rosta Farzan, and Licia Capra for their useful feedback on the manuscript. This research
was partly supported by the EU Grant “GO GREEN ROUTES” no. 869764.
Data Availability
The daily aggregates of the measurements are available at: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.14892642.
v1. The tweet IDs we used are available at https://github.com/echen102/COVID-19-TweetIDs. Other datasets
and visualizations are available on the project’s site http://social-dynamics.net/EpidemicPsychology.
Competing Interests
The author(s) declare no competing interests.22 HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER
Supplementary Materials
Spatial representativeness of Twitter data. To make sure that the geographical penetration of our Twitter
data reflects the spatial distribution of the U.S. population, we compared the user activity in each state with
the census population. Figure S1 shows that both the number of Twitter users and the volume of their tweets
correlate very strongly with the census population population estimates in year 2019 at the level of US states
(https://www.census.gov).
14 15 16 17
log(population)
12
13
14
15
16
log(#tweets)
R
2 = 0.939
r = 0.97
¯ = 1.088
14 15 16 17
log(population)
9
10
11
12
13
14
log(#users)
R
2 = 0.952
r = 0.976
¯ = 1.106
Figure S1. Correlation of the census population of US states estimated in year 2019 with: the
number of tweets posted in those states (left), and the number of unique Twitter users who posted
at least one tweet (right) during the period of analysis. A linear fit is shown together with the
coefficient of determination for a linear regression (R2
), the Pearson correlation coefficient (r), and
the coefficient of the fit (β). The number of tweets and that of Twitter users scale almost linearly
with population estimates.
Signals of racism in Twitter discussions. To corroborate the qualitative intuition that the first phase was
characterized by discussions that depicted the pandemic as a foreign problem, often using racist undertones, we
measured the volume of tweets containing hashtags that were clear indicators of content that is either racist or
aimed at antagonizing China. We manually selected those hashtags from the list of hashtags that appeared at
least 100 times in the dataset. Figure S2 shows the min-max normalized volume of those hashtags over time; they
peak during the first phase, when fear-related mentions and the focus of Twitter discussions on China and Asian
foreigners were at their peaks.
Breakdown of phases by state. During the period of analysis, the country was fragmented into regions that
were dealing with different stages of the outbreak, and the policies to contrast it varied across states. To assess
whether those differences impacted the unfolding of the psycho-social epidemics across states, we computed the
measures that represent the relative presence of the three phases over time (∆%Refusal, ∆%Anger, ∆%Acceptance)
for each state individually. The results are shown in Figure S3. Despite minor differences, the state-level curves
indicate that: i) the three phases took place in all states; ii) the sequence of the phases is consistent across states
(refusal is followed by anger, which is then followed by acceptance); and iii) there is very little variation of the
times of transition between phases.HOW EPIDEMIC PSYCHOLOGY WORKS ON TWITTER 



NEW PAPER


Role of Focusing on the Positive Side During COVID-19 Outbreak: Mental
Health Perspective From Positive Psychology
Keiko Yamaguchi
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan
Yoshitake Takebayashi
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan, and
Fukushima Medical University
Mitsuhiro Miyamae, Asami Komazawa, Chika Yokoyama, and Masaya Ito
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan
This paper discusses how positive emotions can help maintain and improve mental health during the
COVID-19 outbreak, taking into account examples of social interaction and positive psychology research
efforts in Japanese context.
Keywords: positive emotion, COVID-19, pandemic, strength
The uncontrollable spread of coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19)
has been promulgating a sense of fear and hopelessness, and
there seems to no longer exist a safe place anywhere in the
world. Mental health crises are occurring worldwide, affecting
individuals in a variety of ways, including stress, anxiety, fear,
helplessness, and depression. Although the number of
COVID-19 infections and mortality rates in Japan have remained relatively low compared with those in Western countries, the country is still on the edge of an explosive spread of
infection (Looi, 2020), and thus, there is a rising public interest
in mental health care. Previously it has been shown that positive
emotions, such as comfort, happiness, joy, love, and gratitude,
can help maintain and improve human mental health. However,
given that the positive emotions are often experienced in interpersonal relationships, the current situation that requires maintaining social distance inhibits the development of positive
emotions and forms the basis of the mental health crisis.
In the current situation, various initiatives have been implemented worldwide and also throughout Japan to maintain fun and
emotional connections through social interaction while maintaining physical distance. For example, the Japanese musician Gen
Hoshino (2020) proposed to relish his song, “Dancing on the
Inside,” by layering sounds and images in different ways, and
people responded by uploading their enjoyable moments on social
networking sites, attracting a lot of attention online. There is
another example of Nintendo Co., Ltd.’s online videogame called
Animal Crossing: New Horizons in which the players go freely
back and forth between each other’s houses to engage in social
interaction in virtual space (Strampe, 2020). Such efforts that are
put together to facilitate joyful and emotional connection, even
while maintaining a physical distance, represent a positive change
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Based on the findings of psychology research, positive emotions
have also been shown to be important for the psychological recovery process of individuals who have experienced intense stress
or have developed mental disorders, such as depression. For example, emotion regulation utilizing positive emotion during negative emotional states explained the depressive symptoms prospectively in a questionnaire survey conducted on university students
(Yamaguchi, Ito, & Takebayashi, 2018). Additionally, previous
research has shown that deliberately savoring ordinary and casual
behavior using the five senses can help amplify positive emotions
(Quoidbach, Berry, Hansenne, & Mikolajczak, 2010). Based on
these findings, the positive valence system-focused cognitivebehavioral therapy for anhedonia has been developed and is undergoing a clinical trial in Japan (Ito et al., 2019). Therefore,
whereas it is normal to feel anxious and exhausted during the
ongoing crisis, focusing on and savoring the positive emotions that
can be felt in the midst of it could serve as the first step in feeling
more calm than ever before.
Editor’s Note. This commentary received rapid review due to the timesensitive nature of the content. It was reviewed by the Journal Editor.—
KKT
This article was published Online First June 11, 2020.
X Keiko Yamaguchi, National Center for Cognitive Behavior Therapy
and Research, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan;
X Yoshitake Takebayashi, National Center for Cognitive Behavior Therapy and Research, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, and
Department of Health Risk Communication, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University; X Mitsuhiro Miyamae, National Center for
Cognitive Behavior Therapy and Research, and National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry; Asami Komazawa, Chika Yokoyama, and X Masaya Ito, National Center for Cognitive Behavior Therapy and Research, National Center of Neurology and
Psychiatry.
The authors declare no conflict of interests.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Yoshitake
Takebayashi, Department of Health Risk Communication, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University, 1 Hikarigaoka, Fukushima City, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan. E-mail: ytake2@fmu.ac.jp
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Psychological Trauma:
Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy
© 2020 American Psychological Association 2020, Vol. 12, No. S1, S49 –S50
ISSN: 1942-9681 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/tra0000807
S49Moreover, the psychological crisis we are facing right now can
prove to be a turning point for looking back at what is most
important to us and also discovering new aspects about ourselves.
For example, recognizing the physical, social, and psychological
resources present around us and searching their strengths as we
reflect on small daily experiences may provide further hints for
building personal resilience (strengths-based cognitive-behavioral
therapy; Komazawa & Ishimura, 2017; Padesky & Mooney, 2012).
It may also serve as an opportunity to observe our experience of
psychological well-being and to reflect on the purpose and meaning of our lives (e.g., Fava, Cosci, Guidi, & Tomba, 2017). The
COVID-19 pandemic could rightly be termed as a loneliness
pandemic (Santos, 2020); however, focusing on the positive side
will not only help alleviate the loneliness but will also give us the
strength to survive this difficult phase.
Although we hope for this crisis to end soon, the COVID-19
pandemic portends to be more prolonged than initially expected.
Therefore, if we continue to merely endure the negative emotions,
we will soon run out of patience and tolerance. Thus, devising a
way of life that allows us to stay with the feelings, such as joy,
calm, and happiness, even in the crisis situation, may, in turn, help
in the maintenance of our mental health in the long run. In Japan,
where the COVID-19 outbreak has not yet hit as hard, it would be
worthwhile to learn from the world’s previous outbreaks, and
tackle the stress of the current pandemic better, through the use of
preventive mental health care strategies from a positive psychological perspective. It should also be considered that the mental
health care strategies introduced in this paper are few of the
various approaches available and that each approach should be
applied according to the social situation and individual needs.



NEW PAPER



INVITED REVIEW
Experiences and Learnings From Professional Psychology Training
Partners During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Impacts, Challenges,
and Opportunities
Vina M. Goghari
University of Toronto
Sara Hagstrom
Northern Ontario Psychology Internship Consortium, St.
Joseph’s Care Group, Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada, and
Canadian Council of Professional Psychology Programs
Stewart Madon
Accreditation, Canadian Psychological Association, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada
Karen Messer-Engel
Association of Canadian Psychology Regulatory Organizations,
and Saskatchewan College of Psychologists, Regina,
Saskatchewan
The declaration of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic in March 2020 has impacted all of
society and had unprecedented, transformational effects on professional psychology training within just a few
months. This review gathers knowledge from the leaders of three of the main training partners in Canada, the
Canadian Council of Professional Psychology Programs (CCPPP), the Accreditation Panel of the Canadian
Psychological Association, and the Association of Canadian Psychology Regulatory Organisations (ACPRO),
as well as the Editor of Canadian Psychology. We share our experiences and learnings about the profound
effect COVID-19 has had on academic programs, internships, accreditation, and regulatory functions. The
review discusses the training pathway from student learner to licensed psychologist; the prominent educational, advocacy, and regulatory bodies associated with psychology training in Canada; pandemic-related
challenges to training; an ethical decision-making framework developed for the Canadian context that may
help in mitigating these challenges; the resulting guiding and aspirational principles for decision making
during the pandemic; and personal examples of the pandemic’s impact on our roles and affiliated organisations. Although the COVID-19 pandemic has created many challenges for professional training, the pandemic
has also been a catalyst for change within the profession, encouraging expansion of tele-education and
telehealth practices. The pandemic has encouraged enhanced communication within the whole training
community, consensus-based ethical decision making, and has encouraged a focus on defining our professional priorities. The professional psychology training community has faced and will continue to face
multifaceted and complex problems as a result of the pandemic. In the end, however, we hope to emerge from
the COVID-19 pandemic as a more resilient, reflective, and cohesive professional psychology training
community.
Editor’s Note. This Invited Review received an Editorial review by
Elizabeth Votta-Bleeker.—VG
Vina M. Goghari, Graduate Department of Psychological Clinical Science, University of Toronto; Sara Hagstrom, Northern Ontario Psychology
Internship Consortium, St. Joseph’s Care Group, Thunder Bay, Ontario,
Canada, and Canadian Council of Professional Psychology Programs;
Stewart Madon, Accreditation, Canadian Psychological Association, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; X Karen Messer-Engel, Association of Canadian
Psychology Regulatory Organizations, and Saskatchewan College of Psychologists, Regina, Saskatchewan.
We are indebted to Deanna Toews for her editorial assistance. We thank
the executive members of the Canadian Council of Professional Psychology Programs for their assistance to the Canadian Training Committee
during the COVID-19 pandemic: Brooke Beatie, Elena Bilevicius, Jacquie
Cohen, Catherine Costigan, Jason Doiron, Lesley Lutes, Amanda Maranzan, Kerri Ritchie, and Sue Vandermorris. We thank Carole Sinclair, Chair
of the Canadian Psychological Association (CPA) Committee on Ethics,
and Deborah Dobson, Chair of the CPA Accreditation Panel for their
editorial comments and suggestions. We also thank the members of the
CPA Accreditation Panel for their responsiveness and efforts during the
COVID-19 pandemic: Douglas Cane, Damien Cormier, Niki Fitzgerald,
Elaine de Guise, Anusha Kassan, Matthew McDaniel, and Mark Olver.
Last, We thank the directors of ACPRO for their consultation and support
in addressing the issues that have arisen as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic: Stéphane Beaulieu, Gordon Butler, John Harnett, Andrea
Kowaz, Rick Morris, Jacques Richard, Alan Slusky, Philip Smith, and
Richard Spelliscy.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Vina M.
Goghari, Graduate Department of Psychological Clinical Science, University of Toronto, 1265 Military Trail, Toronto, ON M1C 1A4, Canada.
E-mail: vina.goghari@utoronto.ca
Canadian Psychology / Psychologie canadienne
ISSN: 0708-5591 2020, Vol. 61, No. 3, 167–189
© 2020 Canadian Psychological Association http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/cap0000250
167Public Significance Statement
The COVID-19 pandemic has been present for a relatively short period of time and has caused large
disruptions to professional psychology training. In Canada, all aspects of the professional psychology
training pathway, from student learner to licensed psychologist, have been impacted; in this review,
we detail the most prominent challenges for academic programs, internships, and accreditory and
regulatory bodies. We also discuss the opportunities that have arisen to enhance our professional
psychology training, including tele-education and telehealth, enhanced communication and collaboration between all training partners, and practicing and refining our ethical decision making. In
summary, we leave the readership with a few aspirational thoughts from our learnings and experiences, including the value of being community-focused and student-centred where feasible; facilitating equity, diversity, and inclusion; and being transparent and humble in our communication and
knowledge in this rapidly evolving situation.
Keywords: clinical psychology, counselling psychology, education, psychology health service providers,
school psychology
The psychology professional training community is a vibrant
group of students and trainers, as well as educational, advocacy,
and regulatory organisations that work together to train and license
ethical and competent psychologists. The process of professional
psychology training is complex and requires effective partnerships
between academic institutions, hospitals and other clinical training
sites, and accreditation and regulatory bodies. However, in early
March 2020, the normal complexities of training became further
complicated. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organisation
(WHO) announced a worldwide coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic owing to the spread and impact of the
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2),
which affected all aspects of society and all facets of professional
training. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the Director-General of
the WHO, stated: “This is not just a public health crisis, it is a
crisis that will touch every sector—so every sector and every
individual must be involved in the fight. I have said from the
beginning that countries must take a whole-of-government, wholeof-society approach, built around a comprehensive strategy to
prevent infections, save lives and minimise impact” (World Health
Organisation, 2020). Indeed, soon after this announcement, international travel was highly restricted, individuals began working
from home wherever possible, nonessential services were closed,
and physical distancing was enforced in public settings. These
necessary public health policies greatly disrupted the Canadian
psychology professional training community’s capacity to provide
its typical quality of education in many sectors.
In response to this pandemic, psychology professional training
underwent rapid and widespread changes. Universities moved to
online platforms for graduate classes, most research labouratories
closed, practicum training was paused in many jurisdictions, the
nature of internship training was affected, service provision shifted
toward telehealth, and exams required for licensure (e.g., the
Examination for Professional Practice in Psychology) were postponed. In short, every aspect of psychology professional training
was affected.
Within this short time frame, educational, advocacy, and regulatory organisations and associations took up the charge of producing guiding principles, letters, and statements to advise both
academic and internship training directors and students about how
to deal with the most pertinent and time-sensitive issues. These
documents provided direction on a wide variety of issues arising
from the impact of COVID-19 to date, including the following: (a)
overall principles to guide decision making and problem solving,
(b) specific guidance on how to make decisions regarding dealing
with reductions in clinical hours for students and interns, and (c)
reentry into clinical settings.
Because a great quantity of information has been produced in a
very short time, the goal of this review is to bring together
knowledge gathered from various training partners, as well as from
our own experiences throughout this process, regarding how academic programs, internships, accreditation, and regulatory functions have been affected by COVID-19. Personally, as the Editor
of Canadian Psychology, a member of the Canadian Psychological
Association Accreditation Panel (CPA Panel), and Graduate Chair
of a clinical psychology program at the University of Toronto who
is navigating the disruption in academic and clinical training
environments in my program as a result of COVID-19, my goal is
to assist the professional training community by compiling knowledge and information thus accumulated and continuing the conversation regarding our ongoing issues. To this end, I have invited
some colleagues who are leaders in the training community to
share their knowledge, experiences, and learnings. Sara Hagstrom,
PhD, C.Psych., was the President of the Canadian Council of
Professional Psychology Programs (CCPPP) when the pandemic
first emerged, serving from 2018 to May 2020, and she continues
to serve on the CCPPP Executive as Past President. She is also the
Director of Training for the Northern Ontario Psychology Internship Consortium (NORPIC). Stewart Madon, PhD, C.Psych., has
been the Registrar of Accreditation for the Canadian Psychological
Association (CPA) since 2015 and is also Ethics Officer for the
CPA. Karen Messer-Engel, M.A., R.Psych., is the Chair of the
Association of Canadian Psychology Regulatory Organisations
(ACPRO), as well as the Executive Director and Registrar of the
Saskatchewan College of Psychologists. She also previously
served as a member of the Board of Directors of the Association of
State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB, 2013–2018).
We acknowledge that this review cannot be wholly comprehensive
168 GOGHARI, HAGSTROM, MADON, AND MESSER-ENGELof all issues facing trainers, students, institutions, and associations
related to professional psychology; it is simply a snapshot of the
current and continuously evolving picture.
This review first provides a summary of the training pathway
from student learner to licensed psychologist (also referred to as a
registered psychologist), as well as an overview of the prominent
educational, advocacy, and regulatory bodies associated with training in Canada. Second, we detail some ways that training has been
affected by COVID-19 from the perspective of academic programs, internship settings, and regulatory bodies. Third, we describe how an ethical decision-making framework was generated
and then used to develop guiding and aspirational principles for
decision making during the pandemic; we also provide a summary
of the main ones. Fourth, we provide personal examples of how
our roles in professional training have been impacted and how we
have attempted to use the guiding principles to adjudicate issues
we are facing in our work. Last, because any stress to a system
provides opportunities to learn and strengthen various elements of
our pathways, we provide suggestions to the field regarding how
we can build a more robust training environment.
The Training Pathway From Student Learner to
Licensed Psychologist
The pathway to licensure and working as a professional psychologist involves numerous steps and many different organisations and is documented in Figure 1. There is no single authority
or organisation within that pathway that provides exclusive oversight and, depending on the particular stages students are at within
the pathway, different organisations and programs play relatively
larger roles in their success and progression toward their goal.
When students first contemplate a career as a psychologist, they
must enroll in an undergraduate academic institution offering a
bachelor’s degree with a major in psychology or affiliated field.
For undergraduate students, the focus is typically on developing
and fostering relationships within the academic world, gaining
research experience, maintaining a high grade point average, and
applying for federal and provincial funding where relevant. One
key consideration for students hoping to obtain graduate-level
applied training is to ensure that the graduate programs to which
they apply are part of provincially or territorially chartered universities.
Graduate Professional Psychology Training at
Academic Institutions
After a graduate professional psychology training program admits a student, that academic institution is responsible for ensuring
that the student is progressing successfully through the various
degree requirements. Some university programs offer combined
master’s and doctoral degrees, some require separate applications
to each degree, and almost all require students to complete comprehensive examinations, a thesis at the master’s level, and a
dissertation at the doctoral level, as well as a full 1-year predoctoral internship (also referred to as a residency) completed at a
CPA- or American Psychological Association (APA)–accredited
internship program or equivalent (CPA, 2019). The process of
applying for a predoctoral internship very closely resembles the
national matching service process that medical residents undertake
when applying for their specialty residency. Students must (a)
obtain consent and support from their academic institution through
a verification letter that attests to their readiness to proceed to
internship training, (b) familiarize themselves with and complete
the Association of Post-Doctoral and Internship Centers’ Application for Psychology Internships (AAPI), (c) obtain three references
from practicum and research supervisors, and (d) apply to their
desired internship sites.
Internship
Internship directors review the completed AAPI application
forms (length averages 50 – 60 pages) and offer interviews to
potential candidates who might be a good fit for the internship
rotations and experiences offered. The application process happens
during the fall months of the academic year, and interviews occur
at the beginning of the winter academic session, typically finishing
in January. Both internship applicants and internship programs
decide whether to rank each other, and both parties submit their
rankings to a national matching service. In February, the results of
the match are released. A second phase of the match then occurs,
on a much smaller scale, for applicants and programs who remain
unmatched after the first phase. If positions or unmatched applicants remain after both phases of the national matching process are
complete, an informal “clearinghouse” phase provides an opportunity to fill those positions. While the student completes a fullyear paid internship with a formally accredited internship external
to the student’s academic program and the internship can recommend a pass or fail for the internship year, the decision to confer
a pass on the student for the predoctoral internship lies solely with
the academic program. Further, it is the academic program that
determines whether all degree requirements have been met and
decides whether a degree will be conferred.
Accreditation
The CPA plays a vital role in a student’s career pathway through
the accreditation of academic and internship programs. In particular, the CPA Accreditation Panel and its Registrar serve the vital
Figure 1. Depiction of relationships between organisations associated
with doctoral-level professional psychology training in Canada. See the
online article for the color version of this figure.
COVID-19 LEARNINGS IN PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING 169function of protecting the learner and ultimately the public through
ensuring adherence to national standards for training, which are
derived through inclusive consultation with the profession and the
training community. Both academic and internship programs can
apply for accreditation, a process that includes both a documentary
and in-person review of the program and its staff, students, and
facilities. Once obtained, programs must ensure that they continue
to meet the national standards for delivery of education and training in professional psychology through annual reporting to the
CPA Accreditation Panel and periodic reaccreditation site visits.
Accreditation is issued in terms lasting from three to seven years.
Applying for Licensure
Once an individual successfully earns a graduate degree in
psychology from an academic institution, the graduate then begins
the process of applying to a provincial or territorial regulatory
body. The regulatory body’s mandate is public protection, and part
of meeting this mandate involves ensuring that those applying for
licensure have met established standards for training in the profession. The work carried out by regulatory bodies is prescribed by
provincial or territorial legislation, which varies across jurisdictions. For example, jurisdictions may have unique requirements in
terms of the number of practice hours or types of training experiences that individuals must have to be eligible to apply for licensure. Additionally, jurisdictions do not necessarily license the
same competency areas related to professional psychology training. The regulatory bodies work closely together and collaborate
with the training community, with the end goal of assuring that
those trained in the profession are competent, ethical, and prepared
to enter practice, in the interest of protecting the public.
Organisations Involved in Professional Training
Given the complexity of professional psychology training, the
training community is supported by various organisations, each
with a different scope and mission. These membership bodies
comprise groupings of programs, regulatory bodies, organisations,
corporations, or associations who all share a common goal or
similar objectives. Although the membership groups have differing
mandates, they share a common priority: that is, to ensure that
those who enter the profession are competent, ethical, and well
equipped for the challenges of the role of professional psychologist. Regulatory organisations’ mandate is to protect the public,
and this is achieved through licensing psychologists, overseeing
the provision of psychological services, and addressing concerns
raised regarding members of the profession. The mandate of advocacy organisations is to promote the profession of psychology,
influence public opinion, and work toward policy improvements
that enhance people’s quality of life. Educational organisations
have the common mandate of ensuring the ongoing delivery of
high-quality standardized education and training to individual student learners. Many different organisations in the world, within
North America, and within Canada fulfill these various mandates.
Figure 2 presents organisations germane to Canadian professional
psychology.
Regulatory Organisations
The regulation of psychology in Canada occurs at the provincial
and territorial level, and jurisdictions may differ in their standards
for licensure, licensure processes, and regulatory philosophies. The
Association of Canadian Psychology Regulatory Organisations
(ACPRO, 2020) is a corporation whose members are the 10
provincial and one territorial (Northwest Territories [NWT]) regulatory organisations for psychology in Canada. Its mission involves facilitating information sharing among the organisations
that regulate the practice of psychology in Canada, and as appropriate, to work together to address issues of common concern, so
as to strive for excellence in public protection. Meanwhile, the
mission of the ASPPB (2020a) is to support member regulatory
jurisdictions in Canada and the United States in fulfilling their
responsibility of public protection. This organisation also owns
and administers the Examination for Professional Practice in Psychology (EPPP).
Advocacy Organisations
Advocacy organisations exist at various jurisdictional levels to
influence public policy and promote excellence within the profession of psychology. Provincial and territorial advocacy associations are composed of members who practice psychology within
their jurisdictions and, much like the CPA, each association strives
to advance the profession within its province or territory. At the
national level, the Council of Professional Associations of Psychology (CPAP, 2020) promotes collaboration and resource sharing among the provincial, territorial, and national psychological
Figure 2. Organisations associated with the Canadian context with regulatory, advocacy, and educational missions in professional psychology.
ACPRO  Association of Canadian Psychology Regulatory Organisations;
ASPPB  Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards; CPA 
Canadian Psychological Association; CPAP  Council of Professional
Associations of Psychology; APPIC  Association of Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers; CCDP  Council of Canadian Departments of Psychology; CCPPP  Canadian Council of Professional Psychology Programs; CCTC  Council of Chairs of Training Councils;
CUDCP  Council of University Directors of Clinical Psychology. See the
online article for the color version of this figure.
170 GOGHARI, HAGSTROM, MADON, AND MESSER-ENGELassociations. As the national professional association for the science, practice, and education of psychology in Canada, the Canadian Psychological Association (CPA, 2020a) is the country’s
largest association for psychology. Its vision is a society in which
understanding of diverse human needs, behaviours, and aspirations
drive legislation, policies, and programs for individuals, organisations, and communities. Its mission is to advance research, knowledge, and the application of psychology in the service of society
through advocacy, support, and collaboration.
Educational Organisations
The membership of educational organisations consists of representatives from universities and internship sites—typically training
directors—and inclusion occurs based on their shared mandates,
missions, and values. The CPA supports the work of academic
programs and internships in Canada through accreditation, as
adjudicated by the CPA Accreditation Panel (CPA, 2020b). The
membership of the panel consists primarily of past or current
training directors, professionals working in the provision of professional psychology education and training, and a student member; the Panel’s work, in turn, is supported by CPA’s Registrar of
Accreditation. The mandate of the CPA Accreditation Panel is to
promote excellence and innovation in psychological education
through its accreditation standards and procedures for doctoral and
internship programs in professional psychology. The panel accredits such training programs but does not accredit, register, license,
or certify individuals to practice psychology in Canada.
CCPPP (2020b) represents the various university-based professional psychology programs and internship settings in Canada that
train professional psychologists such as clinical psychologists,
counselling psychologists, and clinical neuropsychologists, as well
as those in other branches of professional psychology. The Council
of Chairs of Training Councils (CCTC, 2020b) consists of heads of
North American training councils and has the mission to provide a
forum for communication among doctoral, internship, and postdoctoral training associations in psychology. The Association of
Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers (APPIC, 2020a) is
a membership organisation for internships and postdoctoral programs in professional psychology and is dedicated to providing
resources for training directors, psychology interns, and intern
applicants. This organisation also facilitates the national match for
internships each year.
The Council of University Directors of Clinical Psychology
(CUDCP, 2020) is a membership organisation for academic institutions based primarily in the United States; however, some Canadian university training directors also belong to this group.
CUDCP’s purpose is to promote the advancement of graduate
education in clinical psychology that produces psychologists
trained to generate and integrate scientific and professional expertise to further psychological science, the professional practice of
psychology, and human welfare.
Finally, the Council of Canadian Departments of Psychology
(CCDP, 2020) is a membership organisation mainly composed of
chairs or heads of departments of psychology. The CCDP serves
an advocacy and informational role in relation to regional and
national agencies that provide research and scholarship funds. It
also provides leadership and perspective in regard to undergraduate and graduate education, as well as research taking place within
psychology departments.
The Impact of COVID-19 on Academic Training
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on academic training
programs has been widespread, encompassing courses, research,
practicum, internships, and graduation. As phased recovery begins
in different provinces and territories, and universities begin to
reopen, institutions will have to be judicious in deciding how to
provide a safe environment that allows for physical distancing, as
well as supplying personal protective equipment (PPE) and ensuring sufficient cleaning, in accordance with public health requirements. Additionally, programs will need to assess carefully when
and how to allow student learners to return to practicum based on
site, learner, and client considerations.
Courses
Campus closures and the cancellation of in-person classes were
among the first impacts of COVID-19 at postsecondary institutions, with universities declaring a move to remote-only instruction
beginning in mid-March. Within days, instructors had to learn how
to use various video conferencing and online teaching tools to
deliver academic programming. Fortunately, most institutions
were approaching the end of the winter semester, with approximately three weeks of classes left to complete. Launching courses
online set in motion a host of issues such as protecting the
intellectual property of online teaching delivery methods, ensuring
the academic integrity of exams, guarding protected testing materials, and teaching across time zones to accommodate students who
had returned home. Many universities plan to continue to operate
largely online for the Fall 2020 semester as well, and many
beyond. This will have broad implications; launching an entire
curriculum online is quite a different challenge from using online
tools to finish delivering a small portion of an in-person curriculum. Most instructors and training directors are not experts in
online educational pedagogy, and it will be challenging to offer
experiential courses such as neuropsychological assessment in a
fully online format. The training community will need to address
these complex issues.
Research
The need to ensure physical distancing has compelled a majority
of research labouratories to shut down. This closure has disrupted
in-person research activities, with many institutions presently supporting only online research and critical research. For many students, this has meant having to defend theses based on smaller
sample sizes, removing certain studies from their theses, or shifting their studies to be conducted online. For some students, the
pandemic will require them to reformulate their research ideas and
methods and completely pivot their research. As phased recovery
and reopening commence across the country, in-person human
research will likely be the last research activity to restart. Moreover, it is uncertain when research with vulnerable populations will
be permitted again and, even if it does restart, when it might be
ethical to recruit participants to physically come to research sites.
This disruption to research may create several issues for training
and learners. If students take longer to complete their degrees
COVID-19 LEARNINGS IN PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING 171relative to their prepandemic timelines, the students may need
tuition waivers and extensions to their funding cohort. Additional
money may be required to support students to facilitate adaptations
of the ways they conduct their research. Furthermore, as time goes
on, supervisors may be in an increasingly compromised position in
terms of their own funding, as they continue to employ students
and staff while their research labs are shut down and may not have
extra money to pay graduate students who need extended timelines. Fortunately, some individual institutions are offering tuition
waivers and funding for students to pivot their research. The
Tri-Council Agencies have also extended funding for four months
for scholarship or fellowship holders of Canada Graduate Scholarships (master’s, doctoral, and Vanier streams), Banting Postdoctoral Fellowships, and agency-specific doctoral and postdoctoral
programs ending between March and August, 2020 (e.g., Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council [SSHRC], 2020a).
This represents a $40 million investment in training by the federal
government. The Tri-Council Agencies have also allowed for
extensions of grants, extension of funds, and additional funds for
principal investigators, which can be used to support students
(Canadian Institutes of Health Research, 2020; National Sciences
and Engineering Research Council, 2020; SSHRC, 2020b).
Practicum Hours
The pandemic has also profoundly affected students’ practicum,
with virtually all in-person clinical experiences paused and just a
handful of sites offering remote telehealth during the early days of
the pandemic. It is unclear how long this disruption will last and
when hospitals and other clinical sites will be able either to
transition fully to telehealth or to reopen in-person services. The
various closures will obviously result in reductions in practicum
hours for many students. Particular specialties such as neuropsychology are likely to be impacted more than others given their use
of physical testing materials requiring in-person administration, as
well as the need to maintain test security (APA, 2020). In late
March, 2020, the APPIC allowed telephone-based telehealth intervention and assessment to be counted in the AAPI within two
newly created categories, Telephone-based Telemental Health Interventions and Telephone-based Telemental Health Assessment
(APPIC, 2020c). Meanwhile, video conference– based telemental
health services continued to be logged as face-to-face hours in the
existing assessment and intervention categories.
As sites move to using different telehealth modalities, allowing
students to include telephone and telehealth service delivery as
part of their practice hours will bolster their ability to obtain
clinical training and accumulate their required hours. Moreover,
being able to conduct telehealth services competently will represent a further opportunity for growth and training. As practicum
sites begin to reopen during the successive phases of recovery,
academic and practicum training directors will need to ensure a
safe and developmentally appropriate training environment for
students, as hospitals may shift their service provision rapidly to
prioritize clients who urgently require face-to-face services. Training programs based in on-site clinics will have to make decisions
similarly difficult to those of off-site clinics in relation to adapting
their clinic functions for telehealth and implementing public health
policy regarding the in-person reentry of learners and supervisors.
Internship Readiness
Students applying for internship in the fall of 2020 may experience challenges in acquiring the required number of practicum
hours prior to their internship application deadlines. Applicants
this fall will be a mixed group of students: those who were able to
accrue a reasonable number of practicum hours in spite of the
impacts of the pandemic, and others who needed the 2020 summer
and fall practicum to reach their required number. As many students typically acquire more than the 600 total hours (300 direct
hours) required by the CPA Accreditation Panel to apply for
internship (CPA, 2019), it is anticipated that the number of students impacted by this issue of meeting the minimum required
hours will be relatively small. However, the data suggest that
students who have been successful in the match have done so
based on a much higher number of hours than the CPA minimum.
Additionally, a joint statement released by CCPPP, CPA, and
ACPRO (2020; see Appendix A) recommends trying to keep
students on their original timelines; offering holistic training, including practicum, courses, and other forms of professional development; and, where appropriate, exercising flexibility regarding
the minimum number of hours required by sites and by CPA
Accreditation Standards. In addition, it is recommended that the
Director of Training letters issued by academic programs as part of
the AAPI application highlight how the COVID-19 pandemic
disrupted training for individual students and resulted in reduced
training hours and experiences.
Conferring Degrees
To graduate with their PhD, students must finish all program
requirements, including successfully completing their internship and successfully defending their doctoral dissertation. Academic programs ultimately confer the internship pass based on
information provided by the internship sites. If the COVID-19
pandemic disrupts or interrupts training, internship sites will be
providing records to the academic programs regarding the elements of training completed by individual students and whether
they have demonstrated competence regardless of the number of
hours completed. If students’ internships are disrupted, the CPA
Accreditation Panel and CCPPP have suggested that programs
use their holistic training record, including practicum hours and
other program activities, to assess competency (CCPPP et al.,
2020). Additionally, to confer a doctoral degree, a program’s
examining committee must confer a pass on a student’s doctoral
dissertation and oral defense.
For students to graduate with their master’s degree, they must
complete all program requirements, which typically include practicum, course work, and a research project or thesis. Canadian
psychology graduate programs that have integrated master’s and
doctoral degrees may be able to assist master’s students in compensating for any deficiencies in their practicum hours during their
subsequent PhD degree, while still conferring the master’s degree
in the interim. However, where the master’s degree is the terminal
degree and academic training has been disrupted, programs will
have to make difficult decisions regarding whether students whose
training was interrupted succeeded in gaining the required competency and in fulfilling the requirements for the degree to be
conferred.
172 GOGHARI, HAGSTROM, MADON, AND MESSER-ENGELUniversities have largely moved to remote dissertation defenses,
enabling students to graduate when ready. However, delays to
graduation at both the master’s and the doctoral level may occur if
students’ research has been disrupted by changes in their academic
and internship environments that prompt a shift in their research
focus or create delays in collecting data. Another unfortunate and
uncontrollable reality of the pandemic is that students who graduate while COVID-19 restrictions remain in effect may experience
difficulty moving within Canada or internationally to start their
careers or other training opportunities such as postdoctoral fellowships.
The Impact of COVID-19 on Internships
Many facets of internship training have been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Some of the most affected
groups along the training pathway, which have been identified
early, include current interns and prospective interns. Although
indications suggest that students currently completing internships
will be able to weather the disruptions occasioned by the pandemic, for those who will be starting internships in the coming
months, it is not entirely clear what form their training will take.
According to the 2019 match statistics for Canadian psychology
programs, 172 internship positions were filled for 2019 –2020 and,
taking into consideration additional matches that occurred using
the postmatch vacancy service, we can assume that roughly 175
students have been employed in Canadian internship positions
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The bulk of provincially and
territorially declared states of emergency and/or public health
emergency orders were issued over a 10-day period from March 13
to March 23, 2020. During this third week of March, the Canadian
training community became aware first of potential training disruptions for interns currently employed and, second, that the nature
and types of disruption to internships varied widely depending on
practice settings, work locations, populations, and geographic location. Typically, Canadian internship programs start on September 1 and end on August 31 each year with little variation, and they
require 1,600 hr of supervised experience for completion according to the CPA accreditation standard (CPA, 2019). By the time
emergency orders were issued in March, most students completing
full-time internships would have logged approximately 1,000 hr,
with slight variations owing to differences in work weeks (e.g.,
37.5-hr vs. 40-hr work weeks, vacation time taken, professional
education days taken, etc.).
Early discussions across Canada reflected that during the critical
week in mid-March when most of the country shuttered all but
essential service delivery, and organisations deemed essential were
adapting their workplaces to provide remote services, students
with internships in progress were asked to focus on professional
development, educational opportunities, and/or research projects.
These activities largely took the place of traditional service delivery because they could be completed while workplaces took steps
to shift care to virtual modes of delivery (e.g., telephone and secure
video conferencing). Some internship programs have had greater
success than others in integrating remote service delivery. Generally, internship programs’ success in minimising disruptions has
varied greatly based on prepandemic technical expertise, organisational constraints, location, and local COVID-19 case numbers.
Our understanding at the time of writing this article is that no
internships have been formally terminated, but a few students who
were in the process of completing internships have chosen to
return to their home provinces to be with their families and are
providing some telehealth service delivery to their existing clients
under the supervision of their supervisors and within the same
province as these clients. Although redeployment to nonpsychological service delivery has occurred in a very small percentage of
internships, the majority of students are either providing psychological services remotely, practicing social distancing and PPE
protocols for inpatient services, or have been redeployed into other
psychology delivery experiences. A small percentage have been
redeployed and are providing psychological first aid within their
settings to other frontline staff or are facilitating connections
between patients and families.
Challenges are most prevalent in assessment rotations, where
most interactive testing has ceased if it cannot maintain appropriate physical distancing requirements. This, of course, has had a
greater impact on neuropsychology internships or rotations. Another somewhat surprising consequence of COVID-19 has been
the temporary closure and redeployment of allied health departments (e.g., diabetes, bariatrics, etc.) in some hospital settings,
meaning that students may not be able to achieve specified numbers of practice hours during their internships to establish competencies that may be required to register within a specific health
competency postdegree.
Variability has occurred not only between internship settings,
but also within internship settings, particularly in consortium settings where the types of rotations and experiences that students
receive have varied greatly. In a small number of cases, students
have experienced minimal internship disruption if the majority of
their service provision was already occurring via telehealth,
whereas the same type of internship in a different setting might see
a student either reassigned to an area still deemed essential (e.g.,
acute mental health inpatient care) or redeployed completely.
Finally, as COVID-19 impacts continue to result in decreased
movement as a result of travel restrictions, internship programs
have shifted their focus to some of the challenges involved in
transitioning their current interns to graduation and to postgraduation plans. For example, internship programs have been fielding
requests from students and from Directors of Training from academic programs for earlier certification of successful completion,
to support students’ planned mobility and the increased time
commitment associated with geographical moves and quarantine
rules (which vary from region to region, but typically involve a
mandated self-quarantine period). Incoming students who are
scheduled to begin their internships share the same concerns and
requirements regarding mandatory self-quarantine prior to starting
their placements if these are located out of province or out of
country.
The Impact of COVID-19 on Regulatory Bodies
To weigh the impact and challenges presented by the
COVID-19 pandemic for regulatory bodies, it is important to
understand that regulation of the psychology profession in Canada
occurs within unique geographic, political, and social contexts.
This has resulted in very real differences between jurisdictions
regarding licensure requirements and expectations for the profesCOVID-19 LEARNINGS IN PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING 173sion. However, Canadian psychology regulators have been working to minimise jurisdictional differences in regulatory philosophies and processes, and this has led to collaborative projects
focused on issues such as licensing foreign-trained psychologists
and developing a minimum dataset for the profession.
The purpose and legislated mandate of professional regulatory
organisations is to protect the public; all their decisions and actions
take place within this frame. In Canada, regulation of the profession occurs in all 10 provinces, the NWT, and Nunavut. Psychology is a self-regulated profession in all Canadian jurisdictions
except for the territories. In most of the country, this regulatory
work is carried out by elected representatives from the profession
itself. Government involvement in day-to-day regulatory activities
varies by jurisdiction and is limited in most cases to the delegation
of legislative authority and limitations.
Regulatory Adjustments
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented unique regulatory challenges in our profession. At a time when physical distancing has
been a necessity, the public’s mental health needs are increasing,
but the profession’s ability to provide services has been impacted.
The pandemic has required regulators to be agile and adaptable. To
say the least, this is not always easy or comfortable, but regulators
are rising to the challenge. For example, regulators have established an agreement and a process enabling licensed psychologists
from one Canadian jurisdiction to provide telepsychology services
during the pandemic in another jurisdiction without having licensure in the receiving jurisdiction, to support their established
clients who find themselves unable to return home as a result of the
pandemic. In keeping with the emphasis on the public interest and
public protection, jurisdictions have agreed to assume responsibility for addressing any concerns about the practice and conduct of
their licensees. This allows for continuity of care and is congruent
with the profession’s ethical responsibility and best practice.
Meeting the Rising Demand for Psychological Services
Regulators in many jurisdictions are also being challenged to
foster an adequate supply of qualified practitioners to meet the
demand for mental health services, which is anticipated to become
increasingly prominent as the immediate physical threat posed by
the pandemic subsides. Thus, many have been working with health
authorities and government ministries in their jurisdictions to
establish emergency licensure provisions and processes to enable
former licensees to be reactivated should the demand for services
outstrip existing jurisdictional resources. Furthermore, as psychologists are challenged to adapt their range and methods of service
delivery in light of the “new normal” created by the pandemic,
regulators are also challenged to provide appropriate guidance to
the profession about issues such as ethical and privacy considerations governing telepsychology practice, the selection of video
conferencing platforms, and public health orders requiring contact
tracing, as well as about how or when to resume in-person service
provision.
Ensuring Continuity of New Member Licensure
The pandemic has impacted the licensure of new members of
the profession in ways that could not have been imagined six
months ago and has necessitated rapid adaptation by both licensees
and regulators. The pandemic temporarily stymied access to the
EPPP (ASPPB, 2020b), the core knowledge examination required
for independent licensure in most jurisdictions in Canada. Oral
examinations essential to the licensure process for many Canadian
jurisdictions were postponed because of public health orders restricting gathering sizes and stipulating physical distancing requirements. As a result, independent licensure has unfortunately
been delayed for many. Regulators have also been forced to
consider how to deliver exams in light of these challenges without
compromising the integrity of the exam process. The ways in
which regulators receive and review documentation have also
necessarily been impacted and had to be modified, with some
jurisdictions moving to fully electronic communications and application processes. Some licensees who are required to log supervised practice hours postlicensure have had their positions redefined or redeployed to address the effects of the pandemic on the
health system, and, in some cases, they have unfortunately lost
positions. Consideration of modifications to requirements will
occur where possible and appropriate.
Maintaining Regulatory Standards
Regulators, training programs, and the CPA Accreditation Panel
share responsibility for ensuring that those who wish to be part of
the profession are competent, ethical, and able to fulfill the responsibilities of professional practice as a psychologist. Regulators
understand that the pandemic has also impacted training and are
cognizant of student concerns that training disruptions might negatively impact their licensure. The pandemic does not alter regulators’ obligation to protect the public; however, nor does it alter
regulators’ responsibility to be fair and transparent in making these
regulatory decisions. Because different jurisdictions have different
licensure requirements, regulators will continue to consider applications individually and on their own merits; some jurisdictions
are required to consider equivalence where appropriate. In such
situations and where deficiencies in training are noted owing to the
pandemic, regulators may have the option of considering the
relevance of other education, training, and experience that applicants have previously gained. In the case of core academic course
work, it might be possible to allow applicants to augment their
graduate training with additional education to address deficiencies
in meeting application requirements.
From a licensure perspective, applicants must possess an
acceptable academic credential conferred by a training program
and demonstrate that they have established the required practice
competencies established by the CPA Accreditation Standards
or, if their degree is at the terminal master’s level or is nonaccredited, by the Mutual Recognition Agreement (CPA, 2004). It
is also vital for applicants to demonstrate that they have met
their core academic course requirements, known as Foundational Knowledge (FK) requirements. Similar to the core practice competencies, the FK requirements are required for licensure across Canada and must be demonstrated at the time of
application. Jurisdictions vary in terms of the stipulated practical experience requirements (e.g., hours, activities) that students must obtain during their graduate training or postdegree
experience to apply for licensure. For applicants obtaining their
qualifications during the COVID-19 pandemic, it is essential to
174 GOGHARI, HAGSTROM, MADON, AND MESSER-ENGELensure that any modifications that training programs have made
to their academic curriculum and/or practical experience (including practicum, predoctoral internships, or postdoctoral
training) are clearly documented for the regulator. Those wishing to obtain their license should start the process by consulting
the website of the regulatory jurisdiction in which they wish to
become licensed to familiarize themselves with the current
licensure standards. They can then contact the regulator if they
have questions about their unique situation or any additional
documentary evidence they may need to provide along with
their application in light of the impact of the pandemic on their
training.
The Role of Ethics in Our Decision-Making Process
Above, we have outlined major areas in which academic
programs, internships, and regulatory bodies have had to make
decisions to address the rapidly evolving disruptions resulting
from the COVID-19 pandemic. Such decisions need to be made
quickly and are often reactive. Nonetheless, as with any decision involving significant ambiguity and multiple stakeholders,
when considering how to respond to a novel situation such as
COVID-19, decision makers can apply the Ethical DecisionMaking Process outlined in the CPA’s (2017) Canadian Code of
Ethics for Psychologists. The steps of this model are reproduced
below. Focal points of analysis that the CPA Accreditation
Panel, CCPPP, and ACPRO leadership have deemed critical in
their usage are documented in Figure 3:
1. Identification of the individuals and groups potentially
affected by the decision.
2. Identification of ethically relevant issues and practices,
including the moral rights, values, well-being, best interests, and any other relevant characteristics of the individuals and groups involved, as well as the cultural, social,
historical, economic, institutional, legal or political context or other circumstances in which the ethical problem
arose.
3. Consideration of how one’s own biases, external pressures, personal needs, self-interest, or cultural, social,
historical, economic, institutional, legal, or political context and background, might influence the development of
or choice between courses of action.
4. Development of alternative courses of action.
5. Analysis of likely short-term, ongoing, and long-term
risks and benefits of each course of action on the indiFigure 3. The Canadian Psychological Association ethical decision-making process. See the online article for
the color version of this figure.
COVID-19 LEARNINGS IN PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING 175viduals and groups involved or likely to be affected,
taking into account relevant individual and cultural, social, historical, economic, institutional, legal, and political contextual factors.
6. Choice of course of action after conscientious application
of existing principles, values, and standards (which includes but would not be limited to relevant laws and
regulations).
7. Action, with a commitment to assume responsibility for
the consequences of the action.
8. Evaluation of the results of the course of action.
9. Assumption of responsibility for the consequences of the
action, including the correction of negative consequences
(if any) or reengaging in the decision-making process if
the ethical issue is not resolved.
10. Appropriate action, as warranted and feasible, to prevent future occurrences of the dilemma (e.g., communication and problem solving with colleagues and team
members or other collaborators; changes in procedures
and practices).
The scope of problems caused by COVID-19 is widespread and
global, suggesting the need to broadly apply certain ethical principles outlined in the Code. Under the present circumstances, using
guidance from the Code is likely to lead to the best potential
courses of action. Although the following section attempts to
address the individual steps in the ethical decision-making process,
the perspective offered is a general one. The underlying premise is
that no single solution is likely to exist and that regardless of the
actions taken by the psychology professional training community
(i.e., CCPPP, ACPRO, and CPA Accreditation Panel), individual
issues and context during the COVID-19 pandemic will need to be
taken into account in determining the path forward.
With respect to the identification of the individuals and groups
potentially affected by the decision, the three parties began with
the assumption that a global pandemic is, by its very nature, global,
and thus it is possible that anyone could be affected by the
decisions made regarding psychology training. However, as noted
previously in this article, the primary stakeholders identified are
learners; doctoral and internship training programs and staff; universities, hospitals, and other health care centres that host internship programs; members of the public served by training organisations and their staff; psychology regulatory bodies; and
professional psychology accrediting bodies.
All of the aforementioned organisational stakeholders have individual, though overlapping, concerns and priorities in relation to
any psychology training decisions. Students, in general, are predominantly concerned with completing their training in a timely
manner so that they may continue along their path to licensure and
independent practice. Training programs, both doctoral and
internship-based, are concerned not only with providing their
students with adequate training and supervision but also with
maintaining their operations within the parameters set by their host
institutions. In the case of doctoral programs, this includes continuing to teach classes, coordinate practicum, and provide research support and supervision. In the case of internship programs,
this includes continuing to train and supervise students in practice,
as well as providing services to the public. Meanwhile, psychology
regulatory bodies are concerned with ensuring adherence to regulatory and professional standards and protecting the public. Finally, psychology accrediting bodies are concerned with maintaining high-quality training within accredited programs.
In identifying ethically relevant issues and practices, one of the
most germane concepts that has emerged as a guide for how to
respond is the concept of vulnerability. When multiple stakeholders are involved, both Principle I (Respect for the Dignity of
Persons and Peoples) and Principle II (Responsible Caring) in the
Code emphasise the importance of identifying the most vulnerable
stakeholders to determine our greatest ethical responsibilities. In
our decision-making process, we have identified students and
members of the public seeking psychological services as the most
vulnerable to the effects of disruptions to psychology training by
COVID-19. Students have little control over the types and amount
of training they are receiving as the result of various changes in
institutional policies in response to COVID-19. For example,
students working in a hospital setting might be redeployed to other
tasks, or their training rotations might be interrupted as a result of
supervisors not being available. Members of the public are also
vulnerable in terms of both the potential disruptions to their
immediate access to psychological services that students provide
in some settings, and also the continued but disrupted need for
regulators and accreditors to ensure the competence of future
psychologists to begin independent practice.
The biases and external pressures of organisational stakeholders
(i.e., the regulators, accreditors, and training programs) necessarily
revolve around maintaining high-quality training, with the goal of
ensuring that those applying for licensure after completing their
training will be competent and ethical practitioners. However, in
working to achieve these goals, it is important to consider the
operational limitations of individual sites and programs (e.g., the
possible closure of sites to nonessential personnel, redeployment
of supervisors, or cancellation of practicum training). In addition,
in light of the suddenness with which government health authorities have had to implement measures to curb the spread of
COVID-19, and given the need to address changes to training and
work environments within a reasonable time frame, the scope of
actions taken by the training community in the early days has been
limited to three cohorts of students, namely: (a) students currently
completing internships, (b) students applying for internships in the
fall of 2020 and whose practicum placements were affected by
pandemic-related closures, and (c) students beginning internships
in the fall of 2020.
In analysing the likely risks and benefits and choosing a course
of action, it has been important to recognise that the internship is
one of the culminating activities for students seeking doctoral
degrees in professional psychology. This full-year training placement serves as an opportunity for students to consolidate and
synthesize the didactic and practical training completed over the
course of their doctoral training. For the first cohort of students—
those currently completing their internships—this activity might
be truncated or modified in some instances. As a consequence,
students may be unable to complete this requirement with the same
rigour as might have been expected prepandemic. Both programs
and accreditors have decided to allow for flexibility in completing
176 GOGHARI, HAGSTROM, MADON, AND MESSER-ENGELthis training requirement. Such flexibility allows students to be
awarded their degrees and to progress toward licensing if their
university training programs are satisfied that they are competent
to do so.
It is understood by programs and accreditors that, because of the
cancellation of practicum placements, the second cohort of students—those applying for internships in the fall of 2020—are
likely to have accrued fewer practicum hours than would have
been typical in previous years. In response, they have encouraged
internship programs to consider this when reviewing applications.
This has ensured that these students are not unfairly disadvantaged
when seeking internship placements to complete their degrees.
At the time of this article’s production, it was still unclear to
decision makers what measures would be in place for the third
cohort of students—those beginning internships in the fall of 2020.
Although decision makers have again suggested that programs
take flexible approaches to accommodating this incoming cohort,
little is known about the restrictions that might still be in place for
these students in regard to travel advisories and other institutional
policies intended to prevent transmission of COVID-19.
Lastly, because the long-term effects of the pandemic are as yet
unknown, little information is available yet to evaluate the results
of the decisions taken during these early stages. In keeping with
the ethical decision-making process, the decision makers—
namely, CCPPP, ACPRO, and the CPA Accreditation Panel—
have committed to meeting on an ongoing basis to carefully weigh
and consider any necessary decisions and their potential impact, as
well as to discuss the sequelae of decisions already taken. In
addition, these bodies wish to ensure that any further actions that
may be necessary can be implemented in a timely manner to
mitigate negative impacts for both the public and students, and in
keeping with the goal of maintaining quality psychology training.
To this end, the psychology professional training community has
produced statements jointly (APA, CPA, APPIC, & ASPPB, 2020;
CCPPP et al., 2020; see Appendixes A and B) to guide psychology
training through the modifications needed to respond to the pandemic.
Additional Important Statements From the
Training Community
In addition to the two Canadian-based joint statements provided
in this document, other associations have provided relevant statements that warrant mention. The CCTC produced the “Statement
on Education and Training Considerations during COVID-19 Pandemic” in late March to guide the early days of transitioning
training delivery (CCTC, 2020c). The statement provided four
principles to guide decisions about training: (a) balance, (b) developmentally sensitive student focus, (c) flexibility and creativity
in developing students’ competency and meeting their responsibilities, and (d) social responsiveness. The CCTC also provided six
specific recommendations: (a) limiting in-person contact, (b) adjusting educational and licensing requirements, (c) minimising
adverse impact on students’ finances and program completion, (d)
pursuing access to training beyond distance education, (e) minimising critical resource disparities, and (f) using consultation to
address challenges. In early May, the CCTC released the “Guidance Statement on Resumption of In-Person Psychological Services and Training” to address considerations for resuming inperson services and training (CCTC, 2020a). Although these
considerations applied largely to the American context, many of
the general principles were applicable to the Canadian context as
well, such as health and safety precautions. Additionally, when
resuming in-person psychological services and training, important
considerations include factors such as the following: timing; availability of PPE; staff availability; phasing in tasks that do not
require patient contact; phasing in in-person services and training
with sensitivity to service, patient, and trainee characteristics; and
institutional constraints.
The APPIC Board of Directors also released its “COVID-19
Statement #2” at the end of March, providing principles to consider in decisions related to potential training modifications, including the inherent power differential, resource differential, and
disproportionate professional risk for student trainees (APPIC,
2020b). Its recommendations included immediately employing or
preparing for the use of telehealth; immediately considering workfrom-home options; adhering to the guidelines of the Centers for
Disease Control; attending to APPIC membership criteria; prioritizing training over service delivery; preserving and protecting
student stipends, benefits, and paid leave time; maintaining the
match agreement; and consulting with APPIC regarding problem
situations and concerns. The APPIC statement also addressed the
role of psychologist in medical settings as compared with that of
physicians: “In understanding the particular challenges in medical
settings, it may be helpful to recognise that the ethical obligations
and principles common to psychologists (e.g., duty to safeguard
welfare and rights of both patients and trainees) differ from those
of physicians (e.g., duty to treat patients despite conditions of
personal risk)” (APPIC, 2020b, p. 3).
Additionally, in early April, the Canadian Council of Professional Psychology Programs (CCPPP) released its “Guiding Principles in Response to COVID-19” (CCPPP, 2020a) specifically to
guide Canadian programs. This document recognised that the
pandemic impacted students’ ability to accrue face-to-face practicum and internship hours to apply for internship or complete their
internship. The CCPPP principles recommended that programs
consider students’ needs as central to their decision making; practice open and transparent communication; make every effort to
minimise disruptions to students’ training; and be flexible and
creative in helping students attain their competencies and maintain
their original training timelines (CCPPP, 2020a). Notably, this and
all of the previous statements overlap and are useful in guiding
psychology training partners in our decision making and in understanding our ethical obligations.
Case Examples of Pandemic Impact and Related
Decision Making
Below, we provide examples of how the COVID-19 pandemic
has affected the training offered by an academic program and an
internship, as well as the relevant tenets, aspirational statements,
and guidelines their leadership has implemented in their decision
making. We also provide an example of how the CPA Accreditation Panel and a regulatory body have been impacted by COVID19. We thought that readers might particularly appreciate the
perspectives of our accrediting body and a regulator, given their
focus on public protection and on ensuring that licensees are
competent and ethical practitioners.
COVID-19 LEARNINGS IN PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING 177Example 1: Vina Goghari—Clinical Psychology
Program, University of Toronto Scarborough
Rapid decision making in a young program. To provide
some context for my experience, the Graduate Department of
Clinical Psychological Science at the University of Toronto Scarborough (UTSC) has 34 students and is quite a young program,
having admitted its first cohort in 2013. We were first accredited
in 2018 and had our first University of Toronto Quality Assurance
Process site visit in March 2020. This year, our first cohort of
students began their internships and we were looking forward to
our first dissertation defenses over the summer. I had taken over as
chair of the graduate program on May 1, 2019, and had completed
not quite one full year in the role. It was already incredibly busy
chairing a young clinical psychology program with new milestones
to prepare for every single year. I was not expecting a pandemic to
be a focal part of my first year.
In the first few days after COVID-19 hit, I would simply sit with
my computer and try to keep up with the deluge of e-mails and
emergency meetings. Staying on top of the new developments
unfolding every day was a full-time job—and a stressful one at
that. I was very apprehensive about the decisions I would have to
make regarding my graduate department’s academic continuity
and the short- and long-term repercussions of those decisions for
safety and training. I was also concerned that I would have to
modify our program before our first cohort had even graduated and
applied for licensure. I told people, only half in jest: “We are
modifying our experiment before we know the results!”
After two weeks marked by a constant influx of information, I
had some time to start thinking proactively about my program,
informed by guidance from the University of Toronto School of
Graduate Studies (SGS), as well as by guidelines, letters, and joint
statements from professional psychology training bodies (e.g.,
Association of Psychology Postdoctoral & Internship Centers,
2020b; CCPPP, 2020a; CCPPP, CPA, & ACPRO, 2020; CCTC,
2020a, 2020c). As time passed and events left me no choice but to
act, I adjusted to the “new normal.” Making decision after decision, I gained confidence in my abilities and was thankful for the
support and guidance I received from the professional training
community. I was especially grateful for the openness, patience,
and support of our students, staff, and faculty. Below, I describe
my efforts to provide academic continuity in our program and the
decisions made regarding the program.
Mitigating student stress. In our program, we have acknowledged that during COVID-19, our central priority is to provide the
best possible academic environment for our students while ensuring the safety of our students, staff, and faculty. As a program, we
also recognise that students have experienced different levels of
disruption, from minimal to fundamental, in their personal and
professional lives. Our program is cultivating a community of
caring, consistent with the philosophy of University of Toronto’s
School of Graduate Studies, where we demonstrate flexibility and
compassion in all interactions with students. I have started to hold
monthly town halls to keep students apprised of restart and recovery initiatives, as well to elicit their feedback on the program and
any unique stressors they may be experiencing. Additionally, an
extra packet of money became available to us as a result of reduced
training costs; given the disruption in students’ professional activities, we reallocated this money to the students, granting each one
$300 to spend on online courses, books, and other activities.
Program decisions.
Institutional support. The School of Graduate Studies and the
University of Toronto Scarborough provided emergency bursaries
to support graduate students facing financial difficulty as a direct
consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic. The School of Graduate
Studies also provided COVID-19 mentorship forms for students
and supervisors to submit to the program to chronicle the disruption they experienced in different areas of graduate training. This
information was then sent to the deans of our faculty and of the
School of Graduate Studies so that they could assess the level of
disruption to students’ training and help develop procedures to
address it. The School of Graduate Studies and other divisions at
the University of Toronto have continued to seek ways to reduce
tuition costs for students forced to extend their timelines, and to
provide pivot funding for students who must radically change their
research focus due to this unprecedented disruption. I am also
fortunate to belong to a University of Toronto Council of Health
Sciences Working Group on Curriculum and Licensing Alternatives, which meets weekly to discuss issues facing professional
training programs in the health sciences, share information and
tools, and participate in developing policies such as regarding the
reentry of learners into hospitals and community training sites. I
have been very grateful for the opportunity to participate in and
benefit from collective decision making.
Course continuity. One of my priorities was to ensure that our
program could mount its courses online so that graduate students
could complete the final three weeks of their winter semester. I
asked all instructors to complete a UTSC form to describe the
disruption they experienced in their classes and the modifications
they made. In addition, to ensure transparency and equitable processes, students and course instructors were required to discuss any
modifications to course syllabi, with students given the opportunity to vote on these changes. Now, we are planning to offer our
fall semester courses online as well. Planning for the fall semester
presents a stark contrast to the sudden transition undertaken in the
final weeks of the winter semester, because “saving” the last three
weeks of a semester is a considerably different undertaking than
launching a curriculum that is fully online from the outset. In
addition, our program will have to think through how to launch
online adaptations of experiential courses such as cognitive assessment. We are fortunate to benefit from sharing experiences and
resources through various professional training programs and organisations.
Research continuity. With research labouratories closed, research continuity has also been an area of great concern and
attention. The University has been unified in wanting students’
research and progress to suffer as little as necessary. One week
after research labs closed, I instituted a process in our program to
allow students to make changes to their proposed master’s theses
and doctoral dissertations. As proposals are often seen as a “contract” between students and their supervisory committee, we encouraged students to shift their research to online venues, reduce
sample sizes, and so forth, with the approval of their supervisory
committee and the graduate chair, to ensure procedural consistency
and fairness across students, supervisors, and committees. Students
then completed an academic continuity form to describe this
consultation process and the resulting changes to their proposals,
178 GOGHARI, HAGSTROM, MADON, AND MESSER-ENGELand this documentation now forms part of their file and supersedes
their previously defended proposal. We also intend to make use of
pivot funding for research available through UTSC and tuition
waivers through the School of Graduate Studies. Additionally, the
university is allowing fully remote PhD dissertation defenses.
Though our program is disappointed to be unable to hold these
defenses in person and to celebrate this foremost milestone with
our first cohort of students, we are nonetheless grateful that our
students can graduate.
Clinical continuity. Clinical practicum have been an equally
important focus for our program. All in person practicum are
currently paused in the Greater Toronto Area until early July, with
a limited number of placements having implemented telehealth.
Early on in the pandemic, I checked in with all the students at their
various sites to confirm that no one was engaging in any in-person
practicum experience. In addition, our program had a contract with
the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) to provide
our students with a summer clinical experience, which was students’ primary assessment experience in their second master’s
year. Unfortunately, that experience was cancelled because of
COVID-19 and its demands on clinics and supervisors. Because
our program views its master’s and doctoral degrees as a single,
integrated training experience, we will help our students to make
up this missed assessment experience through other practicum
experiences over the course of their PhD.
However, the loss of the summer clinical experience meant that
our master’s students were not fulfilling their degree requirements,
as they receive course credit for their assessment practicum. Since
we had no equivalent experience to offer students, we applied for
a Non-Standard Reduction of Program Requirement(s) to allow us
to change the master’s requirements accordingly so that our students could earn their master’s degree without interruption and be
consistent with their original pre-COVID-19 timelines, in keeping
with the COVID-19 guidelines provided by several training partners (e.g., CCPPP, 2020a; CCTC, 2020c). Typically, this type of
exception is rarely granted, but in the context of COVID-19, good
alternatives are unfortunately often lacking.
For doctoral internships that were already underway in March
2020, I checked in with doctoral-level students and their internship
training directors to assess any risks to these placements. Fortunately, none of our students or sites reported such major disruptions in internship training to raise concerns that they would be
unable to fulfill the minimum requirements to pass their internships. For students applying for internships for the coming year,
we will follow the best practice of allowing them to apply based on
expected hours accumulated and competencies previously developed (CCPPP et al., 2020). In our program, this particular cohort
of students is the group exhibiting the highest levels of anxiety, as
for many, some of the core practicum training they were scheduled
to complete in the summer and fall has been and may continue to
be disrupted by the pandemic. I have encouraged these students to
meet with me early if they plan to apply for internships, so that we
may review their training and assess what steps we can realistically
take to strengthen their applications. These students must also
submit an internship readiness form by July 1 at the latest.
In summary, the pandemic has had a profound effect on our
training program in terms of courses, research, and clinical training. Of utmost importance, I attempt to convey humility in that our
decision making is based on limited information and on looking
forward into an uncertain future, and I encourage all stakeholders
in our program to reach out if they have questions or concerns.
Fortunately, despite being physically distanced from one another,
we have been able to maintain and actually increase our sense of
community by instituting more frequent conversations between
students and myself as their Graduate Chair. Further, to ensure that
students do not miss out on program activities, I am also continuing to offer all our usual programming, albeit in a remote format,
including our summer celebration, student welcome, and orientation. In addition, the pandemic has also provided opportunities for
our program to discuss privilege and equity in professional psychology training and in our lives, as well as to engage in collective
decision making and learn from the experiences of other programs
and training partners. I have personally found the pandemic has
made individuals in our program kinder and more patient. I know
of many occasions when individual students and faculty have
reached out to one another, and to myself, to check in, offer
support, and relay gratitude.
Example 2: Sara Hagstrom—Northern Ontario
Psychology Internship Consortium
Training challenges and opportunities in Northern Ontario.
To provide some context for my experience, NORPIC admitted its
first intern in 2010. When our internship program was first developed, I was an associate director for one of the sites. In 2012, I
took over as the consortium’s Director of Training and over the
next two years, I proceeded to move the internship toward membership with the CCPPP and the APPIC, and eventually toward
obtaining CPA accreditation as well (with our site visit taking
place in 2014). In 2015, we were awarded a 5-year term for our
first accreditation cycle.
NORPIC is located in northwestern Ontario and has had four
students training in four different organisations during the 2019 –
2020 year. One student is placed in Sioux Lookout, Ontario, within
the Sioux Lookout First Nations Health Authority, and one is
working with the Dilico Anishinabek Family Care Team in Thunder Bay, Ontario, with regular weekly travel scheduled to the
surrounding First Nations communities. For these students, telehealth and other virtual care delivery are already standard practice
due to the large geographical area that the organisations serve.
Students training in these locations have therefore been easily able
to rely on all-virtual service delivery as the primary method, with
few challenges. Consequently, the case example below focuses on
our other two students’ internship experiences in hospital and
outpatient settings. These two positions are within acute-care hospital settings and community clinic outpatient settings in Thunder
Bay. Prior to COVID-19, neither student was utilizing technology
to provide care in these settings.
Institutional support. Our host organisation for the consortium and the employer of our interns, St. Joseph’s Care Group, has
stayed ahead of the curve with its COVID-19 safety measures and
precautions. On March 11, almost a full week before the Government of Ontario implemented province-wide emergency orders, all
St. Joseph’s Care Group employees were strongly discouraged
from travelling for either work or personal reasons; if they chose
to continue doing so, they were required to self-isolate for 14 days
upon their return to minimise the risk of transmitting COVID-19.
Any travel out of northwestern Ontario had to be reported, and all
COVID-19 LEARNINGS IN PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING 179work-related travel and activities were cancelled. Physical distancing measures were implemented immediately and screening stations were set up and required for entry into any of our health care
facilities in Thunder Bay. On April 2, 2020, all staff, including
trainees completing internships, were restricted to working at one
site only, preceding the provincial order for this practice by 12
days. Starting on April 12, they were also required to wear surgical
masks in the workplace. The first cases of COVID-19 in our region
were not announced until the third week of March. At the time of
writing this article, our region has experienced only one death and
fewer than 100 confirmed cases.
Both the hospital and outpatient clinic settings within St. Joseph’s Care Group and Thunder Bay Regional Health Sciences
Centre implemented a screening app for staff to complete and
submit before entering any workplace setting. The app red-flagged
any staff members who reported symptoms consistent with
COVID-19, and staff members thus identified were subsequently
required to undergo a follow-up before being permitted to enter the
workplace. This app has been continually and frequently updated
as the medical evidence and suggested protocols from public
health departments have changed, and both of our students based
in hospital and acute-care settings have been using the app.
Clinical training continuity. One fortunate circumstance for
our two students completing internships in Thunder Bay is that
mid-March was already the time when they were scheduled to
switch organisations, and thus a reduction in direct service hours
during the couple of weeks’ transition was already built into our
schedule to allow them to complete their client service in one
organisation and to begin the new rotation. This March, by the
time the students transitioned to their new organisations, service
had already been operating virtually in outpatient clinics, they
were able to start with their new clients virtually, and PPE and
distancing processes were already established in the inpatient
setting.
Staff and student interns were asked to transition care and
service delivery to adhere to physical distancing requirements, and
none of our students in outpatient settings was providing in-person
care from March 11 onward. One student working in an inpatient
setting was given the option either to transition completely to an
outpatient setting that offered only virtual (telehealth) care or to
continue offering inpatient in-person service using appropriate
PPE (i.e., mask wear and social distancing when interacting with
clients). In this regard, we considered the principle of students’
needs being at the centre of all decision making, based on the
CCPPP guiding principles in response to COVID-19 (CCPPP,
2020a), and we put each student in charge of making decisions that
felt most comfortable for them. Unfortunately, some of our health
rotation programs, such as bariatrics, were categorised as elective
services by provincial directives at the start of the pandemic, and
thus rotations were not available in such settings. Though these
experiences were temporarily put on hold, they are resuming
virtually in June, and virtual care options (NORPIC purchased
microphone-enabled cameras for the residents) have also been
made available so that student interns can obtain this experience.
Supervision continuity. A consortium program composed of
multiple organisations and one central host agency must address
numerous organisational challenges. Ensuring effective communication between the host organisations and supervisors regarding
the potential for disruptions to training has been vitally important.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, I contacted all supervisors and
encouraged them to contact me if they had any concerns with
respect to internship experiences. Given the global magnitude of
the pandemic and the impact on everyone’s general functioning,
starting in March 2020, I also checked in with our interns more
frequently, replacing both my monthly group meetings and quarterly individual meetings with weekly hour-long individual supervision of my four internship students. Having a weekly connection
with them was helpful for ensuring the ongoing continuity of their
four hours of weekly doctoral supervision during the pandemic,
when supervisors themselves were potentially experiencing disruptions to their schedules. This also ensured that as a program, we
were considering the second guiding principle from the CCPPP
statement—to ensure ongoing, clear, and transparent communication (CCPPP, 2020a). This ongoing connection was also helpful
for tracking and monitoring any anticipated disruptions to the
training schedule.
Professional development continuity. The last major area of
concern related to our in-person education seminars. With social
distancing measures in place, we could no longer meet in our small
telehealth room, which only accommodates two people socially
distancing. Virtual connection options for education seminars were
explored, but due to hospitals’ early constraints in regard to using
virtual platforms, this appeared to be an area where we would
struggle. Thankfully, an innovative partnership with the local
university’s graduate clinical psychology training program
emerged: The program provided Zoom meeting links for our
education seminars, and we extended the invitation to their graduate clinical training students to attend our weekly education
seminars. I needed to make some changes in the lineup of individuals providing the seminars based on their comfort levels with
technology, and we had one week of unfilled time, but we were
able to make this up on May 29, because no seminars had been
scheduled for that week owing to the CPA annual convention,
which was cancelled as a result of COVID-19. We worked hard in
this case to align our consortium with the third principle from the
CCPPP statement—that programs should make every effort to
minimise any disruptions to students’ training (CCPPP, 2020a).
In summary, our ability to weather the pandemic-related disruptions was greatly assisted by our geographical isolation, the delayed spread of COVID-19 into our region, the lucky happenstance
of a previously scheduled transition happening in conjunction with
the outbreak, and the fact that as an internship director, I have 2.5
days dedicated each week to running the internship. Our next steps
include forging ahead with planning for the arrival of our matched
interns for Fall, 2020 entry. Much of the structure that has been
developed to address training in the COVID-19 era will remain
unchanged during the current internship year to ensure that ongoing clinical experiences, education, and supervision continue to the
standard expected. We anticipate that if circumstances remain the
same, some challenges will arise from the mandatory 14-day
self-isolation required for entry into our region, and we are working to develop an orientation platform that is primarily virtual, with
scheduling in place for rotation-based reading and professional
development to minimise any delays in commencing internships.
For students applying to NORPIC for 2021 entry, we are very
aware of the potential for their hours to be disrupted (e.g., fewer
direct hours overall, reduced breadth of experiences, etc.) and will
not penalize applicants for this.
180 GOGHARI, HAGSTROM, MADON, AND MESSER-ENGELExample 3: Stewart Madon—Registrar of
Accreditation, Canadian Psychological Association
The primary function of the CPA Accreditation Panel is to
“uphold the standards of education and training in professional
psychology (defined by the accreditation standards) as it exercises
judgment in making decisions about programs that have applied or
reapplied for accreditation” (CPA, 2019). The three primary functions of the Registrar of Accreditation are to serve as an advisor to
the Panel, oversee the day-to-day logistical operations associated
with accreditation processes, and liaise with other national and
international training partners regarding training and accreditation
matters in professional psychology. The accreditation standards
themselves, though partially prescriptive, offer programs flexibility in meeting them. Indeed, the Panel does not intend for programs to be homogeneous, nor does it intend to manage the
day-to-day operation of accredited programs. Rather, the Panel
acknowledges that individual programs and their administration
are significantly better suited to make decisions for themselves
based on the local needs and realities of their faculty and students,
provided that these decisions align with the accreditation standards.
Given these functions, the Registrar and Panel’s primary concerns during the pandemic have been to identify and provide
mechanisms by which programs could continue to meet the accreditation standards, and to adapt the Panel’s evaluative function
in response to the restrictions imposed by the pandemic. To this
end, the Panel’s response was threefold: (a) through the Registrar,
collaborating with other training stakeholders (e.g., the CCPPP and
ACPRO) to coordinate a Canadian response to the pandemic,
including allowing for flexibility in meeting certain accreditation
standards; (b) cancelling and postponing reaccreditation site visits,
due to travel restrictions; and (c) voting to grant programs affected
by the pandemic an automatic 1-year extension to their accreditation terms, to ensure that no program’s accreditation would lapse
because of an inability to host a site visit within their scheduled
reaccreditation year.
In these responses, the Panel considered the role that the internship plays in establishing competence. Although completing an
internship is considered one of the capstone or culminating activity
of the professional psychology doctorate degree, discussion with
training partners—including regulators—led the Panel to consider
the role of preinternship practicum training in determining competence in professional domains such as ethics, assessment, and
intervention. The primary function of these training experiences
had typically been envisioned as preparing students to apply for
internships. But the pandemic allowed for them to be considered as
training toward prelicensing competency benchmarks as well.
Another factor the Panel considered was the use of technology
in teaching, training, and quality assurance. As noted above, many
programs have had to move to blended or online-only course
delivery methods. Students completing practicum and internships
have been trained to use telehealth methods where such methods
are accessible and appropriate. Given the uncertainty surrounding
institutional reopenings following the pandemic, the Panel might
also need to consider the use of technology in its evaluation
processes, such as virtual reaccreditation site visits. The Registrar
and Panel are working to be responsive to the ongoing developments and frequent changes to meet the multiple needs of stakeholders.
Overall, although the pandemic had—and continues to have—a
significant impact on training, the Panel’s function remains the
same: ensuring the quality of professional psychology training in
Canada through upholding its accreditation standards. The mechanisms and processes by which the Panel accomplishes this may
need to be modified further in the coming months or years to
maintain the continuity of this function.
Example 4: Karen Messer-Engel—Saskatchewan
College of Psychologists
Challenges for regulatory work and licensure. Like many
of my regulatory colleagues in Canada, I was first a practitioner. I
trained in clinical psychology more years ago than I care to
remember and then worked in mental health for 17-plus years. I
joined the Saskatchewan College of Psychologists almost 18 years
ago as its Deputy Registrar and later assumed my current role. The
College was only two years old when I joined as a staff member,
and the work was incredibly challenging and interesting; it still is.
What struck me most prominently when I first joined the regulatory world is that regulation is not about “us and them.” As
members of a self-regulating profession, we are all “us” and need
to work together to ensure that the profession of psychology is
ethical, competent, and a group of which we all are proud to be
part. What I have since learned is that although my responsibility
as a regulator is to protect the public interest, this responsibility is
not antithetical to supporting the profession in meeting its responsibilities of ethics and competence.
The “new normal” created by the pandemic has presented significant challenges for the College’s regulatory work. It is difficult
even to remember when this new normal began—it seems as
though it has been going on forever—and members of the profession understandably have many questions. In particular, they have
questions about future practice and expectations, as it appears
highly unlikely that practice will return to the way it was last year
at this time. Future members of the profession also have important
concerns ranging from, “I am unable to get a criminal record check
or access official transcripts, as agencies have shuttered their
operations to go remote” to “My internship hours were shortened
because the program had to close when the pandemic was declared.” These are important issues, and the College is sympathetic
to the additional stress that the pandemic has added to the already
stressful process of applying for a licensure and practicing as a
member of a regulated health profession. It is important to emphasise that the College’s work must occur within the confines of
legislation, and congruent with our values, we endeavour to be
respectful, collaborative, responsive, and accountable in our work.
The legislation governing the profession in Saskatchewan, The
Psychologists Act (1997) requires new applicants to the profession
to be initially licensed as provisional members until they have
successfully met all the requirements for independent licensure.
These requirements include completing the EPPP (ASPPB,
2020b); logging 1,500 hr of supervised practice under an approved
supervision plan, supervision agreement, and supervisor; and completing a competency-based oral examination interview established by the College (Saskatchewan College of Psychologists
[SKCP], 2019).
COVID-19 LEARNINGS IN PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING 181The College understands and appreciates that after many years
of education and mounting debts resulting from that education,
learners are anxious to begin their professional careers. It is also
understood that the COVID-19 pandemic has necessitated changes
in practice within academia. Applying for licensure is a lengthy
process that requires submitting multiple documents and references that give the regulator as full a picture as possible of who is
applying and their suitability for licensure. To some applicants,
being required to submit multiple forms and documents in a
specific format is frustrating and appears excessive. From the
regulatory perspective, however, this information is essential to
ensure public protection and is not negotiable. As part of the
application process, the College requires that an official transcript
be sent directly from the academic institution showing that the
applicant has been awarded a graduate degree in psychology. The
College anticipates that, because of the pandemic, some applicants
may be unable to submit their transcript in time to accompany their
initial application, because of universities’ shift to online operations and, in many cases, having fewer administrative staff performing work. Although not ideal, in such cases the College will
consider initially accepting other documentation to verify the
credential, to minimise delays in the application process. Modifications to documentary requirements will be considered on a
case-by-case basis.
The impact of training disruptions on licensure. As an
ACPRO member, the College requires applicants for licensure to
have completed certain core academic course work and acquired
core practice competencies at the time of application—namely, the
FK requirements and Mutual Recognition Agreement (MRA)
Practice Competencies, respectively (SKCP, 2019). Prior to the
COVID-19 pandemic, when considering FK requirements and
MRA Practice Competencies, the College has accepted that if the
academic program of study is CPA-accredited and the applicant’s
degree has been awarded, then the FK requirements and core
practice competencies necessary for licensure have been met, by
definition. If adaptations to the academic course and any resulting
impacts have occurred as a result of the pandemic, it is important
that applicants make the College aware of these changes, as
verified by their training director. Consistent with its mandate of
public protection, the College will need to consider the impact of
any significant program modifications on applicants’ eligibility for
licensure. Applications will be considered on their own merits and
with an appreciation of the current reality. In the case of nonaccredited programs, master’s-level training, or a modified CPAaccredited program in which FK requirements have not been fully
met, the College will consider allowing the applicant to obtain the
necessary course work prior to being accepted for licensure.
The legislation governing licensure contains a provision allowing the Registration Committee of the College, if they deem it
appropriate, to waive the 1,500 hr of logged supervised practice for
only those applicants who have successfully completed a CPAaccredited predoctoral internship. Provisional licensees still must
be under direct supervision until they have been awarded an
independent license to practice, but are not required to submit
practice logs at the midpoint and endpoint of the 1500 hr, and their
supervisor(s) are not required to submit midpoint and endpoint
evaluations. The applicant must request this consideration and
must provide documentary evidence from their internship regarding accreditation, practice hours logged, supervision received,
activities undertaken, and overall evaluation of the applicant’s
competency. The decision to waive requirements resides with the
Registration Committee and is not open to appeal.
Should an applicant’s internship be truncated in some manner
due to the pandemic, but they have been deemed by their program
to have passed their internship, it is within the Registration Committee’s authority to accept either a portion of the hours or all of
the hours, and to waive the same portion of the 1,500-hr supervised
practice requirement. Conversely, depending on the number of
hours successfully logged (a minimum 1,500-plus hours), the
decision could be made to waive the entire 1,500-hr requirement
even if the internship was not fully completed according to the
training program.
The College’s approach has always involved being reasonable
and flexible in dealing with new and challenging situations, where
appropriate and where permitted by legislative authority. If anything, the pandemic is definitely presenting us with new and
challenging situations. No one can predict with certainty all of the
impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on students,
applicants, and licensees, but what we can say confidently is that
the psychology regulatory community will continue to exhibit
fairness and transparency in its decisions regarding licensure and
regulation.
Opportunities: What Have We Learned? How Can
We Build a More Robust Profession?
Most of us tend to manage our work and personal lives by
routines. Although the training pathway from learner to autonomous practitioner is complex, as training partners we rarely dwell
on the details of the pathway itself. The disruption of the
COVID-19 pandemic has provided us with the opportunity to
focus greater attention on that pathway and to explore areas where
change may be beneficial or required. We anticipate that professional psychology training will ultimately benefit from the intensive, collaborative rethinking processes that have emerged in
response to the structural and logistical challenges posed by
COVID-19. First, the necessary shift to tele-education and telehealth has created opportunities to provide education and psychological services in a broader, more inclusive manner. Second, the
coordination required to navigate this difficult period in our world
history has highlighted for training partners the interconnectivity
and interdependence of academic institutions, internship programs,
and accreditation and regulatory bodies, and has resulted in necessary and important conversations between these groups. Last, the
pandemic has caused us to bring the focus of our attention back to
the specific goals and objectives of training and how to achieve
these. In short, the disruption caused by the pandemic seems to be
resulting in change to the fundamental nature of training itself.
Tele-Education and Telehealth
A positive effect of being thrust into the world of virtual
technology and virtual platforms is the increased opportunity these
tools offer for providing services to both trainees and clients. As a
direct result of the pandemic, students who typically did not have
access to telehealth experiences within their practicum or internships prior to the pandemic now have the chance to learn a new
modality for offering psychological services. The profession has
182 GOGHARI, HAGSTROM, MADON, AND MESSER-ENGELalso been challenged to reimagine training and its delivery. The
next few months will see new technology-enabled methods for
teaching and for students’ clinical work. In this new technologyenabled training reality, it will be critical to ensure that students
have access to practicum placements and to consider how practical
experience will be offered. The proliferation of virtual or telehealth
options for service provision may now make it possible for students to access practicum experiences in a variety of sites to
augment their in-person training. This development would allow
for greater equity of access to training sites, as well as to different
populations of clients, for all students.
Present service delivery methods represent a significant departure from the most common modalities used prior to the pandemic.
As a profession, we may tend to be cautious about embracing
things that are unfamiliar, especially in relation to the principles of
privacy and confidentiality that are cornerstones of our profession,
and concern about how the “unfamiliar” may impact those principles. Therefore, it is not surprising that historically low numbers
of practitioners have provided technology-aided service delivery
(Hagstrom & Maranzan, 2019). Moreover, we have not had the
time to evaluate critically the ways in which technology may be
able to support and augment our training and service provision.
A recent survey of Canadian academic and internship programs
revealed limited uptake or integration of technology in professional psychology training and service delivery (Hagstrom &
Maranzan, 2019). If the same survey were to be conducted today,
the results likely would reveal much greater technology use and
innovation. This shift is likely attributable in large part to the
worldwide experience of COVID-19 that has played out in all of
our settings and clinics, and which has propelled us forward on a
significant, unified path of technology use. Faced with limited
options, we were compelled to embrace our discomfort with “new”
technological innovations in practice and to appreciate the complexity of the adaptations we asked of our clients and trainees.
Areas of practice that had not typically been viewed as amenable
to telehealth and tele-education, such as neuropsychology, are now
the subject of discussion about how to offer training and services
through virtual formats.
Historically, training associations and accreditation bodies have
relied on the evaluation and discretion of training programs regarding the role of tele-education and telehealth in training and
how these methods translate to the development of competencies
that professional psychologists require. Jurisdictions differ in
terms of accepting full distance education for licensure. The current widespread use of technology presents an opportunity for the
profession to examine this issue with scientific rigour to inform
best practices for its use.
Finally, the present moment also provides an opportunity to
rethink our training programs’ structure and routine offerings. At
a national level, the academic and internship training community
could explore the feasibility of offering virtual professional development seminars relevant to the training needs of all Canadian
students. If this were possible, it would promote greater equity and
standardization in training opportunities. Similarly, conferences
and other such discipline meetings could be offered in both virtual
and in-person formats to increase access to the program offerings,
thus reducing the geographical inequities experienced by attendees
living in rural or isolated locations.
Building an Interconnected Training Community
The pandemic has had one very positive outcome—namely, it
has highlighted the interconnectedness of different training partners and underlined the need for enhanced collaboration and
cooperation between organisations. As noted earlier in this review,
many of the training, advocacy, educational, and regulatory groups
have issued individual and joint statements about coming together
to address common issues, provide guidance to the community,
and clarify their practices.
The pandemic has particularly challenged regulators to work
together to reduce jurisdictional differences where possible, and it
continues to challenge them to capitalize on the gains in consensus
that have resulted from the work they have done to address the
impacts of the pandemic. Going forward, regulators have reaffirmed their commitment to the mandate of public protection and
to working in a fair and transparent manner in their regulatory
work with the profession.
Regional and cross-disciplinary partnerships and relationships
have also been forged. The Canadian Neuropsychology COVID
Collaboration Forum was established and consists of more than
100 neuropsychologists in academia, hospitals, schools, and private practices. Training directors have been brought together
through the CCPPP, through greater resource sharing, and through
an enhanced level of assessing how programs are functioning amid
the pandemic. The College of Psychologists of Ontario has also
brought academic and internship training directors together for
years, and recently there has been a call to meet more frequently
to benefit from collective decision making, resource sharing, and
understanding the actions that other programs are taking.
Ethical Decision Making and Aspirational
Principles in Action
The COVID-19 pandemic has occasioned a thorough investigation of the training community’s priorities. Because many different
training partners and associations and their respective priorities
carry weight in decision making, we have had ample opportunity
to put our ethical decision-making principles into action. We have
discovered that different groups necessarily prioritize different
stakeholders. Regulatory and accreditation bodies primarily prioritize the protection of the public (regulation/accreditation) and
students (accreditation); this is achieved by establishing standards
for training and accreditation (accreditation bodies), the licensure
of individuals (regulators), and the oversight of practice and conduct (regulators). Academic programs and internships prioritize
the public and also their learners, who are vulnerable within both
the university and hospital settings. Interestingly, students still in
residence at their university have had quite different experiences
during the pandemic compared with those of students completing
their internships. For example, students still in residence in their
programs, university courses have moved to online delivery, and
practicum have been paused or moved to virtual formats in the
early months. In contrast, most students whose internships were
already in progress have continued to provide services, often in
person. Hospitals must prioritize the needs of their clients and thus
have had to focus not only on how to provide practicum and
internship training for students, but often on how these students
may continue to help to meet clients’ service needs as well. Lastly,
COVID-19 LEARNINGS IN PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING 183all organisations have financial needs that often dictate the nature
of the support available to the various stakeholders. In response to
the challenge posed by the pandemic, meeting these needs has
resulted in some students being redeployed to work unrelated to
their original internship placement, as well as the pivoting of
research and corresponding tuition support for graduate students.
We offer the following aspirational principles for decision making
based on our experiences and learnings.
Aspirational Principles Guiding Decision Making
Community focus. The most important principle during the
COVID-19 pandemic is making decisions that focus on the safety
of all members of our community, including the reopening of
training sites to learners in a manner that is safe for them and for
the public they serve. Additionally, as we adapt our training
program procedures and regulatory practices to address the challenges presented by the pandemic, we must maintain a standard of
training that is high and continues to be in the public interest.
Furthermore, the longer our training programs continue to operate on virtual platforms, the more important it is to ensure that
we retain a sense of community and solidarity within our programs. A bigger-picture question for training programs to consider
is, “How do we build camaraderie between students within a
cohort and program, and also among members of the new incoming cohort?” We suggest that it is important wherever possible to
strive to continue to offer the same programming, including student welcomes and orientations, albeit in a remote format.
Student-centred approach. At this time more than ever, we
suggest that a student-centred approach is essential in academic
and internship programs. Of all the parties in academic and internship training programs who have been affected by the pandemic,
students as a group are the most vulnerable. Students often are not
engaged in decision-making processes and frequently are not kept
informed about these processes. During COVID-19, providing the
best training environment possible for students while ensuring
their safety, as well as that of staff, faculty, and clients, must be a
central priority. We must also recognise that students’ personal and
professional lives may have been disrupted on many levels, with
some students experiencing profound disruptions that require
greater flexibility from their training sites.
Equity, diversity, and inclusion. Unfortunately, the most
vulnerable individuals are often the most affected by events such
as the COVID-19 pandemic. Groups who have been historically
underrepresented in higher education—such as racialized students
and those of lower socioeconomic status (Perna & Jones, 2013)—
have also historically experienced worse overall health outcomes
during pandemics relative to other groups (Green et al., 2013;
Levy, Nguyen, Westheimer, & Layton, 2013; Lowcock, Rosella,
Foisy, McGeer, & Crowcroft, 2012; Moran, Kubale, Noppert,
Malosh, & Zelner, 2020; Placzek & Madoff, 2014). COVID-19
data from the United States reveals that the overall mortality rate
for Black Americans has been 2.3 times higher than the rate for
Whites and Asians and 2.2 times higher than the rate for Latinos
(APM Research Lab, 2020). After Black Americans, Indigenous
Americans have been the most widely affected group. In Canada,
data from Ontario show that neighbourhoods that are more ethnoculturally diverse have had higher rates of COVID-19 and related
deaths compared with less diverse neighbourhoods (Public Health
Ontario, 2020). Moreover, the research literature demonstrates
similar systemic differences in terms of the demographic variables
associated with postsecondary students who require supplemental
supports during their academic experience, such as holistic guidance and checking in (Museus & Neville, 2012). In summary, it is
imperative that the training community be knowledgeable about
racial disparities in health and how these may differentially affect
our learners and communities we serve.
One of the ways to mitigate the pandemic’s negative effect on
underrepresented groups in academic and internship settings is to
build a more inclusive environment. This could include providing
access to information to all students, such as through student town
halls that offer all students the chance to ask questions and hear
responses to other students’ questions, rather than waiting for
students to approach us. Moreover, we should circulate information to all students and should specifically send opportunities to
more vulnerable individuals who may need these supports the
most, but who typically do not apply. Fundamentally, we need to
understand that some students may be more profoundly affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic in their professional and personal lives
and may need additional support, resources, or flexibility. Finally,
it continues to be crucial to examine and discuss issues of access
and privilege in academia that have been compounded by systemically reduced opportunities for underrepresented groups.
Transparency and humility. We would suggest that a key
priority in these challenging times is to be as transparent as
possible in disclosing training-related decisions and the information that informs our decision making. Although information about
COVID-19 is coming in rapidly and continuously, we think that it
is vital to communicate regularly with all stakeholders about its
impacts and the decisions it prompts. We should also acknowledge
with humility that our decision making is based on limited information and on looking ahead to an uncertain future.
Summary
As we write this article, the pandemic has been in effect for
three months. Projections suggest that COVID-19 will be with us
for a long time; as a society, we may have to adjust to its continued
presence. The present picture can offer only a snapshot of current
experiences and learning; our priorities and the particular stakeholders affected will shift as the pandemic runs its full course. We
understand all stakeholders’ desire for clarity and for immediate
decisions and actions; however, certain decisions must wait until
more facts are known. Regulatory bodies have yet to contend with
certain questions regarding how to assess learner profiles affected
by COVID-19, as the cohorts previously mentioned are either still
progressing through the training pathway or have yet to begin.
Similarly, academic institutions face uncertainties. Universities
will not have a clear indication of their finances until student
enrollment numbers are known; further, the longer the pandemic
lasts, the longer their revenue-generating ancillary services will be
closed. Meanwhile, internship settings do not have control over
broader hospital policies of redeployment and learner safety. The
CPA Accreditation Panel will have to grapple with the varying
choices that programs make to adapt to COVID-19 in their individual contexts and within the scope of flexibility and guidance
provided, as well as with how these choices align with accreditation standards.
184 GOGHARI, HAGSTROM, MADON, AND MESSER-ENGELAt a fundamental level, the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on
training give rise to questions about the flexibility of the boundaries in
professional psychology training. We are beginning to modify our
training programs and practice consensus-based decision making in
the training community, but we have yet to understand the positive
and/or negative consequences of our decisions. It would be of much
comfort if our regulatory, advocacy, and educational bodies provided
exact boundaries dictating how flexible training requirements can be,
such as the new minimum number of practicum hours or internship
hours students require to graduate or the practice hours ultimately
needed to become licensed with a regulatory body. Unfortunately, it
is not so simple; all such decisions must consider the unique contexts
of individuals and settings. Although these questions are difficult, in
the end, we sincerely believe that we will emerge from the COVID-19
pandemic as a stronger, resilient, and more reflective training community. We are proud of how our learners have handled this crisis to
date. With this adaptable group of individuals as the future of the
profession, we are confident that our profession is in good hands.
Résumé
La déclaration de la pandémie de coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19),
en mars 2020, a touché toute la société et a eu des effets transformationnels sans précédent sur la formation en psychologie professionnelle en quelques mois seulement. La présente étude recueille
les connaissances des dirigeants de trois des principaux partenaires
de formation au Canada, le Conseil canadien des programmes de
psychologie professionnelle (CCPPP), le Groupe d’agrément de la
Société canadienne de psychologie, et l’Association des organisations canadiennes de réglementation en psychologie (AOCRP),
ainsi que le rédacteur en chef de Canadian Psychology. Nous
partageons nos expériences et nos apprentissages concernant
l’effet profond de la COVID-19 sur les programmes scolaires, les
stages, l’accréditation et les fonctions réglementaires. L’étude discute du parcours de formation : étudiant a` psychologue agréé; des
principaux organismes éducatifs, de défense des droits et de réglementation associés a` la formation en psychologie au Canada; des
défis de formation liés a` la pandémie; de l’élaboration d’un cadre
de prise de décisions pour le contexte canadien pouvant aider a`
atténuer ces défis; des principes directeurs et ambitieux qui en
résultent pour la prise de décisions pendant la pandémie; et des
exemples personnels de l’impact de la pandémie sur nos rôles et
nos organisations affiliées. Bien que la pandémie de COVID-19 ait
posé de nombreux défis pour la formation professionnelle, elle a
également été un catalyseur du changement au sein de la profession, favorisant l’expansion des pratiques de télééducation et de
télésanté. La pandémie a favorisé une meilleure communication au
sein de la communauté de formation entière, des prises de décision
éthiques fondées sur un consensus et nous a encouragés a` définir
nos priorités professionnelles. La communauté de formation en
psychologie professionnelle a été confrontée a` des problèmes
complexes et aux multiples facettes a` la suite de la pandémie. Or,
en fin de compte, nous espérons sortir de la pandémie de
COVID-19 en tant que communauté de formation professionnelle
en psychologie plus résiliente, plus réfléchie et plus cohésive.
Mots-clés : psychologie clinique, psychologie du counseling, éducation, prestataires de services de santé en psychologie, psychologie scolaire.


NEW PAPER


Commentary: Reflections on the COVID-19
Pandemic and Health Disparities in Pediatric
Psychology
Jessica Valenzuela,1 PHD, Lori E. Crosby ,
2,3 PSYD, and
Roger R. Harrison,4,5 PHD
1
College of Psychology, Nova Southeastern University, 2
Division of Behavioral Medicine and Clinical Psychology,
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 3
College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 4
Nemours/Alfred
I. duPont Hospital for Children, and 5
Sydney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson University
All correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Lori E. Crosby, PsyD, Division of Behavioral
Medicine and Clinical Psychology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, ML 7039,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. E-mail: lori.crosby@cchmc.org
Received 29 May 2020; revisions received 2 July 2020; accepted 8 July 2020
Abstract
The COVID-19 (2019 novel coronavirus) pandemic has had a significant economic, social, emotional, and public health impact in the United States. A disturbing trend is that Black, Indigenous,
and/or People of Color (BIPOC) are disproportionately contracting coronavirus, as well as dying
from COVID-19. Objective/Methods The pandemic has the potential to entrench and magnify existing health disparities and families marginalized across multiple demographic intersections such as
race/ethnicity, class, immigration status, are especially vulnerable. These inequities have been further underscored by the recent murders of Black Americans by police and a resulting spotlight on
racial injustice in the United States. Results Efforts to lessen the spread of the virus, have resulted
in changes in pediatric primary and subspecialty service delivery which may affect access for
BIPOC communities. BIPOC trainees including those with debt or caregiving responsibilities may
be faced with new barriers resulting in delays in completion of their training. Further, clinical,
community-based, and translational research has been disrupted by heightened safety precautions
and social distancing which may affect BIPOC representation in research downstream. Conclusion
In our roles as clinicians, supervisors, trainees, and researchers in primary and subspecialty care
as well as in academia, pediatric psychologists have an ethical responsibility to address the disproportionate burden of this pandemic on vulnerable communities and to allocate our time and
resources to ensuring health equity now and in the aftermath of COVID-19.
Key words: clinical; economic disadvantage; race/ethnicity; research; training.
Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting all segments of
life in the United States (economic, social, emotional,
and public health). Every U.S. state and territory has
experienced significant numbers of cases and deaths
due to COVID-19. A disturbing trend has persisted as
states report data on illness, hospitalizations, and
deaths due to COVID-19; Black, Indigenous, and/or
People of Color (BIPOC) are disproportionately contracting coronavirus, as well as dying from COVID-19
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020).
The disparate impact of the coronavirus on BIPOC
has been linked to preexisting inequities including
poorer access to healthcare, low-wage employment,
VC The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of Pediatric Psychology.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 839
Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 45(8), 2020, 839–841
doi: 10.1093/jpepsy/jsaa063
Advance Access Publication Date: 8 August 2020
Commentary
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jpepsy/article/45/8/839/5885276 by guest on 18 July 2021increased likelihood of living in crowded spaces, overrepresentation in detention/correction facilities, and
more (Fortuna et al., 2020).
As noted by the current president of the American
Psychological Association (2020), the COVID-19
pandemic is occurring in the middle of a “racism pandemic,” highlighting the psychological (e.g., anxiety,
depression, traumatic stress disorders) and physical
health toll of racism. Consequently, BIPOC communities are struggling to manage the effects of COVID-19
as well as the burden of racial injustice in the US,
underscored by the recent murders of Black citizens by
police and nationwide protests against injustice and
police brutality.
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to significant
changes in pediatric primary and subspecialty service
delivery, including the ability of pediatric psychologists to remain integrated in medical settings. As part
of efforts to “flatten the curve,” or halt the spread of
infections, pediatric healthcare providers have limited
in-office visits, implemented social-distancing measures during visits, and migrated to digital telehealth
platforms for many visits that would ordinarily result
in a referral or “warm handoff” to psychology.
Although using these platforms to provide patient
care holds promise for increasing access to the underserved, there is some evidence of problematic inequity
in accessibility and acceptability of such platforms.
Vulnerable families may have limited/no access to internet service or compatible devices to support telehealth visits. Families with young children may not
have a caregiver present during the day because of
their status as low-income “essential employees” (e.g.,
retail, childcare workers, medical assistants, housekeepers) and have greater exposure risk to coronavirus.
Families marginalized across multiple demographic
intersections such as race/ethnicity, class, and/or immigration status, are especially vulnerable. Non-Englishspeaking families face unique barriers, including difficulty accessing instructions to virtual care and limited
interpreter services on virtual care platforms.
Furthermore, preliminary research on BIPOC perceptions of telehealth services suggests that Black patients
may experience less trust in services where the provider
is not physically present, and have concerns about privacy and confidentiality when using these services
(George et al., 2012).
It has been well established that racial and ethnic
minorities are more likely to have chronic medical
conditions (diabetes, chronic lung disease, and cardiovascular disease) that exacerbate the effects of
COVID-19 (John Hopkins Medicine, 2020) potentially influencing caregivers’ willingness to bring their
children to hospitals or clinics for care. Furthermore,
marginalized families with high levels of mistrust of
the medical system or those experiencing healthrelated stigma may be more likely to avoid preventive
care (e.g., immunizations). Although the impact of
unmet or delayed care is unknown, we anticipate that
these inequities may have long-term consequences for
disease morbidity, health-related quality of life, and
mental health.
Given existing disparities in morbidity and mortality,
BIPOC trainees may be more likely to be caring for sick
or elderly relatives. Furthermore, first-generation and
BIPOC trainees may be more likely to experience delays
in training due to debt, limited savings, gaps in childcare,
and loss of employment during the pandemic. These
inequities are likely to negatively affect the pipeline of
underrepresented students now and in the near future.
Clinical, community-based, and translational research have been especially impacted by the pandemic.
BIPOC families may be reluctant to participate in research studies requiring clinic or hospital visits due to
concerns about their health and safety. In addition,
community-based research projects may have been
disrupted as community partners have had to shift
their focus to service provision. These changes could
lead to problematic representation of BIPOC communities in research.
Opportunities for Pediatric Psychologists to
Focus on Inequity
The current pandemic has the potential to entrench and
magnify existing health disparities. We have focused
predominantly on the impact in BIPOC communities
and have also noted the importance of marginalized
intersections. There are many examples of unique impact to diverse populations that warrant consideration
by pediatric psychologists. For example, transgender
youth have experienced gender affirmation surgery
delays and cancelations during COVID-19, and youth
with certain disabilities may be particularly isolated during this time because of their inability to wear facial
coverings safely. However, as noted earlier, some of the
media attention surrounding recent police murders of
Black individuals has especially heightened awareness in
the United States regarding significant social injustices
for BIPOC. In our roles as clinicians, supervisors, trainees, and researchers, pediatric psychologists have an ethical responsibility (Beneficence, Justice, and Respect for
people’s dignity) to address the disproportionate burden
of this pandemic on vulnerable communities and to allocate our time and resources to ensuring health equity
now and in the aftermath of COVID-19 (American
Psychological Association, 2017). We encourage our
colleagues to take the following steps:
• Advocate. Capitalizing on our understanding of the social and
structural contributors to health, pediatric psychologists should
advocate for (a) routine assessment of psychosocial risk factors
840 Valenzuela, Crosby, and Harrison
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jpepsy/article/45/8/839/5885276 by guest on 18 July 2021(food insecurity and lack of childcare) in healthcare settings, and
(b) better social supports (e.g., transportation, internet access,
housing assistance, access to medical supplies) as current options
often do not meet the needs of BIPOC.
• Adapt. Utilize evidence-based interventions that promote resilience and mitigate social determinants (e.g., parent training,
peer-based interventions, etc.; Fortuna et al., 2020). Adapt our
current interventions to meet the needs of non-English speaking
families. Create interventions that address race-based and other
forms of identity-based trauma.
• Research. Conduct innovative research that examines structural
racism (e.g., Index of Race-Related Stress: Utsey & Ponterotto,
1996; police traffic stop data: Baumgartner et al., 2017) as a mediator and/or moderator (Neblett, 2019) and on the impact of
bias on health outcomes.
• Promote. Pediatric psychologists should promote ongoing efforts
to diversify our workforce (including BIPOC, bilingual and bicultural psychologists), and mentor and support BIPOC pediatric
psychologists into positions of influence across the field.
• Train. Transform the training of the next generation of psychologists by incorporating courses that specifically examine the history of race and the consequences of racism into graduate
student training, as well as instruction that emphasizes the role
of social justice, anti-racism, or other movements designed to dismantle identity-based oppression and injustice.
Funding
L.E.C. was supported in part by the CCTST at the
University of Cincinnati which is funded by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical and Translational
Science Award (CTSA) program (Grant 2UL1TR001425-
05A1).
Conflicts of interest: None declared.



NEW PAPER


Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in
Psychology
Psychology Students’ Motivation and Learning in Response to the Shift to
Remote Instruction During COVID-19
Ellen L. Usher, Jonathan M. Golding, Jaeyun Han, Caiti S. Griffiths, Mary Beth McGavran, Christia Spears Brown, and
Elizabeth A. Sheehan
Online First Publication, June 17, 2021. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/stl0000256
CITATION
Usher, E. L., Golding, J. M., Han, J., Griffiths, C. S., McGavran, M. B., Brown, C. S., & Sheehan, E. A. (2021, June 17).
Psychology Students’ Motivation and Learning in Response to the Shift to Remote Instruction During COVID-19.
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Psychology. Advance online publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/stl0000256Psychology Students’ Motivation and Learning in Response to the Shift
to Remote Instruction During COVID-19
Ellen L. Usher1, 2, Jonathan M. Golding2
, Jaeyun Han1
, Caiti S. Griffiths1
,
Mary Beth McGavran2
, Christia Spears Brown2
, and Elizabeth A. Sheehan2
1 Department of Educational, School, and Counseling Psychology, University of Kentucky 2 Department of Psychology, University of Kentucky
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to dramatic shifts in the teaching and learning of
psychology. The purpose of this study was to document the impact of those shifts on
undergraduate psychology students’ motivation and self-regulation of learning during the
initial transition to remote instruction. Psychology majors (N = 358) attending a public landgrant university in the southeastern U.S. voluntarily completed a survey at the end of the
Spring 2020 semester. Closed- and open-ended items assessed students’ self-reported
behavioral and psychological wellness, motivation, and learning experiences during the
COVID-19 outbreak. A convergent mixed methods analysis was used in which open-ended
questions provided context and experiential nuance to quantitative findings. Students reported
increases in sleep, social media use, gaming, and procrastination, but decreases in academic
motivation and self-regulation (e.g., focusing, juggling responsibilities). Over 75% reported
increases in stress, which they attributed most frequently to motivational and academic
challenges. Students reported learning less in most of their classes following the shift. They
attributed this to internal factors, including self-regulatory/motivational difficulties, and
external factors, such as instructional delivery modality. Although most perceived their
instructors as understanding, nearly half reported a decline in instructional quality and
communication after the shift to remote instruction. Over one third of students reported feeling
less certain about their future educational plans. Implications for the provision of institutional
and instructional supports for college students during and beyond the pandemic are discussed.
Keywords: higher education, COVID-19, motivation, self-regulation, undergraduate
psychology
The COVID-19 pandemic has created largescale disruption in the lives of college students
around the globe. In the U.S., most in-person
postsecondary instruction halted in mid-March
2020, and instructors scrambled to shift their
courses to remote formats, largely via online
delivery (“The Coronavirus is Upending
Higher Ed,” 2020). Many students living on
campuses were urged to vacate their residences
and return to permanent addresses, mostly with
family members. Beyond the boundaries of the
campus, businesses in some parts of the country
shuttered as local officials issued stay-at-home
orders in March and April. The broad aim of this
investigation was to document the impact of these
changes on undergraduate psychology students’
motivation and self-regulation of learning during
the shift to remote instruction in Spring 2020.
Human behaviors, personal (e.g., cognitive,
affective, motivational) factors, and environmental
Ellen L. Usher https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9301-8987
Jaeyun Han https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2009-7191
Caiti S. Griffiths https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9020-
6958
Mary Beth McGavran https://orcid.org/0000-0001-
6258-7992
Christia Spears Brown https://orcid.org/0000-0001-
5161-0077
Correspondence concerning this article should be
addressed to Ellen L. Usher, Department of Educational,
School, and Counseling Psychology, University of Kentucky,
249 Dickey Hall, Lexington, KY 40506-0017, United States.
Email: ellen.usher@uky.edu
1
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Psychology
© 2021 American Psychological Association
ISSN: 2332-2101 https://doi.org/10.1037/stl0000256
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.factors dynamically influence one another
(Bandura, 1986). Changes in students’ physical,
psychological, or educational environment can
affect cognition and motivation (Schunk &
DiBenedetto, 2020). When basic needs are threatened, such as during a global pandemic, individuals
may redirect their goals and motives to maintain
their well-being (Dweck, 2017). When contextual
constraints leave students feeling anxious or uncertain, students may begin to doubt their own capacities, experience distress, or shift their goals toward
something over which they feel they have more
control (Bandura, 1997). Doubts about one’s capability to learn or to effectively regulate one’s life
under changing learning conditions can lead to
increased stress and undermine performance.
Some researchers have begun to document
how the global pandemic has interrupted individuals’ daily life and social relationships, which
have, in turn, led to behavioral and psychological
changes (e.g., Kazak, 2020). Students at all levels
of education faced significant changes as they
were required to switch abruptly to a fully online
learning experience, many for the first time.
During the winter months of 2020, college students in the U.S. showed greater increases in
depression and anxiety than in previous academic
terms (Huckins et al., 2020; see Elmer et al.,
2020, for similar findings from Swiss students).
In China, college students similarly reported
more changes to their daily lives after COVID19 and increased anxiety (Cao et al., 2020).
The pandemic required an immediate shift to
online and remote instruction, presenting new
challenges for teachers and students. Postsecondary educators, many with little or no experience
teaching their content online, needed to quickly
adapt. Research conducted over the past two
decades has shown that, increasingly, postsecondary teaching effectiveness requires more than
just expertise in the content area. Teaching effectiveness relies also on instructors’ abilities to
effectively deliver content through sound pedagogical practices and, more than ever, through the
effective integration of technology (a framework
referred to as Technological Pedagogical Content
Knowledge, or TPACK, Mishra & Koehler,
2006). However, many postsecondary instructors
were ill-prepared for a mass transition to fully
online instruction and had little time to adapt their
pedagogical approach. This abrupt transition
affected learners’ experiences, which, in turn,
become the likely frames through which learners
will approach their educational experiences in
2021 and beyond.
Although the short- and long-term effects of
the pandemic on academic outcomes are not yet
fully known, some evidence has shown that the
COVID-19 crisis has already affected students’
academic progress. A survey of approximately
1,500 undergraduates (50% female; 61% White)
conducted in April of 2020 showed that 13% of
participants expected a delay to their graduation,
and lower-income students were 55% more likely
than higher-income students to face an academic
delay due to COVID-19 (Aucejo et al., 2020). It
is important for researchers interested in improving the teaching of psychology to understand the
challenges and successes of the initial shift to
remote instruction and to glean implications for
how they can best support students’ academic and
psychological well-being.
The purpose of this exploratory study was
threefold. First, we sought to learn more about
how the sudden institutional and environmental
changes affected the psychological and academic
experiences of undergraduate psychology students, particularly with regard to student motivation and self-regulation. Second, we sought to
identify emergent themes related to the ways in
which psychology students perceived the instructional quality, pedagogical approaches, delivery
modality, and instructor support during COVID19. Third, we examined the effects of these shifts
on students’ future academic plans. The following three hypotheses were investigated.
First, we predicted that students would report
increased stress and stress-related behaviors,
increased coping behaviors (e.g., social media,
sleep), decreased motivation, and decreased ability to focus after the shift to remote instruction
compared to before (H1). A recent systematic
review suggested that COVID-19 increases individuals’stress, anxiety, and depression and that
these effects are positively related to level of
education (Salari et al., 2020). Perceived difficulties regulating stress can undermine motivation
and learning (Bandura, 1997).
Second, we predicted that students would evaluate the quality of teaching and learning experiences as generally worse after the shift to remote
instruction compared to before (H2). We expected
students to attribute instructional shifts to decreases in learning, motivation, and ability to
self-regulate. Navigating sudden and widespread
changes in one’s environmental circumstances
2 USHER ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.(e.g., learning context, living situation, pandemicrelated constraints) requires cognitive and emotional resources involved in the self-regulation of
learning (Zimmerman et al., 2017). As their stress
levelsincrease, learners typically experience lower
academic self-efficacy, decreased motivation to
learn, and difficulty managing their course work
(Bandura, 1997).
Third, we predicted that students not graduating in 2020 would report greater uncertainties
about their educational future (H3). From a social
cognitive perspective, contextual changes in
one’s immediate learning environment and in
the broader job market at large can influence
career-related interests, goals, and choices
(Lent & Brown, 2019). The COVID-19 pandemic
has produced instability in the global economy,
which may affect students’ financial circumstances and hinder their academic progress.
Method
Procedure
The researchers sent an email to students
majoring in psychology at a large, researchintensive university in the southeastern U.S.
(N = 1,143; 33% living on campus) inviting
them to participate in a 10-min survey about
their learning and personal experiences during
the shift from in-person to remote instruction
following the COVID-19 stay-at-home orders
during Spring 2020. Participation was voluntary
and no course credit was offered. Researchers
administered the survey during the last 2 weeks
of the semester (i.e., first of May 2020) and
kept the survey open for 1 week after the end
of term. Surveys were anonymous and requested
no identifying information from participants.
The university’s Institutional Review Board
approved the study.
Consenting participants (N = 358; response
rate = 31%) were primarily female (n = 308;
45 male; four transgender; one unreported) and
White (n = 261; 44 Black or African American;
21 Hispanic or Latinx; 18 Asian, Pacific Islander;
10 multiracial; four Middle Eastern). The sample
representation of these demographic groups was
slightly higher than that of all students currently
majoring in psychology at the university
(N = 1,008; 78% female; 67% White). Participant age ranged from 18 to 61 years (M = 21.3,
SD = 4.9). Students were asked to report their
current course load and academic standing during
the spring semester. On average, participants
were enrolled in 4.8 courses (SD = 1.1) and
reported a cumulative grade point average of
3.45 (SD = .51; Range 1.50–4.00). According
to students’ self-reported cumulative credit hours
earned, the sample comprised 50 freshmen
(14%), 83 sophomores (23%), 122 juniors
(34%), 101 seniors (28%), and two nondegree-seeking students.
We also asked students about their living situation and health status. Of the 268 participants
who reported that they did not live with their
parents at the start of the semester, 65% reported
having moved back in with their parents after
midterm (i.e., the start of remote instruction).
Only eight students indicated that they had
been tested for COVID-19, and one reported
testing positive (we did not consider students’
COVID-19 status in further analyses).
The Survey
The research team designed the survey (available from the first author) to investigate changes
to students’ lives after the stay-at-home orders
went into effect during the COVID-19 outbreak
in mid-March 2020. We invited students to
respond to closed- and open-ended items relat
to three broad experiential categories: changes in
behaviors and psychological processes after the
move to remote instruction, changes to the
instructional environment of their courses, and
future plans.
We asked participants to compare the frequency with which they engaged in nine daily
behaviors (e.g., exercise, sleep) before and after
the stay-at-home orders began. Students reported
whether, during the second half of the semester,
they engaged in the behaviors less, about the
same as, or more than before the stay-at-home
orders took effect. Using the same scale, students
also indicated whether their own thoughts and
feelings in four areas (e.g., stress, motivation)
had changed after the move to remote instruction.
Students were then given the opportunity, via two
open-ended questions, to describe their psychological (i.e., “What has been most stressful?”)
and behavioral (i.e., “What has been most helpful
for coping?”) experiences during the stay-athome period.
PSYCHOLOGY STUDENTS’ RESPONSE TO REMOTE INSTRUCTION 3
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.Five item pairs (one closed-ended, one openended) were used to assess students’ perceptions
of the teaching and learning environment following the stay-at-home orders that took place at
midterm. The survey directions first reminded
students of the number of courses in which
they indicated being enrolled during the Spring
2020 semester. Students were then prompted to
indicate how many of their courses improved,
how many stayed the same, and how many
worsened following the move to remote instruction (e.g., in terms of instructional quality, learning) and to evaluate their instructors’ level of
understanding of “how COVID-19 has impacted
students’ college experience and lives.” Each
closed-ended item was followed by a corresponding open-ended question, inviting students to
elaborate. The researchers calculated proportions
for each response category of the closed-ended
items and grouped students according to how they
described their experience in the majority of their
classes (e.g., worse, about the same, better, or no
clear majority) on each of the instructional dimensions of interest.
Three survey items targeted possible effects of
the pandemic and related instructional shifts on
students’ future plans in terms of their (a) level
certainty about career plans (decreased, stayed
the same, or increased), (b) likelihood of returning to the university in Fall 2020 if not graduating,
and (c) thoughts about how COVID-19 might
affect their progress in college.
Design and Analysis
A convergent mixed methods design was used
to analyze the data from closed- and open-ended
questions (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2017). We
used the questionnaire variant approach by presenting participants with qualitative questions
immediately after they responded to corresponding quantitative questions. This approach can
provide context and experiential texture to the
quantitative findings.
Quantitative and qualitative data were first analyzed independently in SPSS 26 and MAXQDA,
respectively. Inductive coding procedures were
used to establish a coding guide for each of the
open-ended questions based on emergent themes.
A team of three coders reached consensus on a list
of codes and definitions for each question (final
codes and definitions are available from the first
author). The coding guide was then applied to 30
randomly selected data segments from each question to ensurethat the coding lists weretenable.We
added new codes or refined coding definitions as
needed to capture emerging patterns. Two researchers then independently coded all responses.
Kappa coefficients of reliability [MAXQDA uses
Brennan & Prediger’s (1981) formula] ranged
from .64 to .95 for each question. The researchers
discussed all discordant codes and reached agreement. Responses initially coded as “Other” were
further examined for meaningful patterns that did
not fit the original coding scheme.
We tabulated coding frequencies as a means of
data condensation (Miles et al., 2019). Proportions were calculated by dividing the coding
frequency for each question by the number of
students who answered the question. This
enabled us to determine which themes were
most salient. Data displays were created across
groups of students who reported having similar
experiences, which permitted us to integrate findings from quantitative and qualitative analyses
and examine commonalities and distinctions in
students’ experiences (Miles et al., 2019).
Results
Behavioral and Psychological Changes
Following Shift to Remote Instruction
Our first research aim was to describe the behavioral and psychological impact of COVID-19 on
psychology students after the shift to remote instruction. Table 1 presents response frequencies for
students’ self-reported behavioral and psychological changes. Most students reported sleeping
more than before the stay-at-home orders were
issued and engaging more often in social media
use, TV watching, talking with family members,
gaming, and procrastinating. In terms of psychological changes, two thirds of students reported
that their stress had increased. Over three fourths
of students reported decreases in their motivation
for school and their ability to focus, and nearly
half reported a decreased sense of confidence in
their academic abilities.
Students’ responses to the open-ended question
about what they found most stressful shed light on
the types of challenges they were experiencing (see
Table 2 for all coding categories and frequencies).
Many mentioned multiple sources of stress. Nearly
one out of three respondents described stress
4 USHER ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.associated with their ability to motivate themselves
or to effectively manage their responsibilities,
which we coded as Self-Regulation/Motivation.
Students’ described stress related to their perceived
inability to focus for long periods of time, declines
in academic motivation, and challenges with time
management (e.g., “self-monitoring; I am not good
at setting my own deadlines.”). Externally imposed
structures (e.g., class meetings and lectures) that
had been in place before the pandemic largely
disappeared, leaving some students feeling disconcerted. Words such as “balance,” “juggle,” and
“keep up” peppered students’ responses. Several
also felt the stress of not feeling able to regulate their
emotional response to the situation.
The second most frequently mentioned source
of stress came from academic and school-related
events, which were mentioned by 25% of respondents. Subthemes are similar to those we discuss
further below: stress induced by shifts in delivery
modality, changes to the course workload, poor
communication from instructors, confusing expectations, difficulty learning content, and insufficient accommodations from instructors.
About one in five students described stress
related to having to move home from college
during the semester. In some cases, this meant
having to renegotiate family roles and dynamics.
Several students felt that their siblings and/or
parents lacked understanding of their academic
responsibilities. Others noted the stress of social
isolation or separation from peers or loved ones.
A related source of distress was losing out on
opportunities or access to resources (e.g., education abroad, on-campus libraries) that otherwise
would have been available.
Over 10% of students mentioned the stress
associated with a sense of uncertainty and lack
of control over their situation and future.
A similar number of students were most troubled
by threats to their basic needs, such as job or food
insecurity, unreliable internet access, or housing
challenges. One student, a junior, noted that she
“was kicked out of the dorms so I had nowhere to
live and can’t go back home because of at-risk
family members. I’ve felt very anxious and
depressed and have to live on my friends’ couch.”
It bears noting that students’ stress responses
varied in degree of intensity. For some, the stress
seemed high and acute (e.g., “My family and
friends are in danger all the time. It’s hard to
keep up with school and stay sane when you’re
constantly worried.”). On the other hand, a small
subset of students reported no sources of stress.
Students described a variety of coping strategies for managing their stress (see Table 2).
Spending time with family and friends
(28.4%), exercising or being outdoors (19.6%),
Table 1
Behavioral and Psychological Changes During COVID-19 Stay-at-Home Order
Behavioral Changes
Since the stay-at-home order began, how would you
rate your behaviors in each of the following areas: n Decreased Stayed the same Increased
Exercise 354 48.9% 23.4% 27.7%
Outdoor activity 353 40.5% 25.2% 34.3%
Talking to friends 354 39.0% 31.1% 29.9%
Eating 354 22.0% 35.9% 42.1%
Sleep 355 20.8% 23.1% 56.1%
Procrastination 354 12.1% 25.4% 62.4%
Gaming 355 8.2% 29.3% 62.5%
Talking to family 354 5.9% 30.5% 63.6%
Watching TV 354 7.1% 20.6% 72.3%
Social media 355 5.4% 19.2% 75.5%
Psychological Changes
Since all courses have been moved to remote instruction,
how would you describe your own thoughts/feelings? n Decreased Stayed the Same Increased
Ability to focus 355 82.0% 12.7% 5.4%
Motivation for school 353 78.8% 16.1% 5.1%
Confidence in my academic abilities 353 44.2% 47.9% 7.9%
Stress 355 11.8% 21.7% 66.5%
PSYCHOLOGY STUDENTS’ RESPONSE TO REMOTE INSTRUCTION 5
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.and hobbies or leisure activities (8.5%) were
helpful ways to manage. Additional coping strategies included spending time on media (e.g., TV,
games, music; 9.0%), being with animals (5.9%),
and establishing a routine (5.0%).
Instructional Changes Following the Shift to
Remote Instruction
Our second research objective was to assess
psychology students’ perceptions regardinginstructional quality following the shift to remote instruction. We examined students’ perceptions of four
aspects of the instructional environment: instructional quality and instructors’ understanding,
workload, learning, and lecture delivery format.
Tables 3 and 4 provide descriptive statistics for
students’ responses to closed-ended questions
and frequencies of codes assigned to their openended responses.
Instructional Quality and Instructors’
Understanding
We first asked students about changes in the
quality of teaching in their courses after the shift
to remote instruction. We also asked students to
rate their instructors’ situational understanding
during the COVID-19 outbreak. On average,
students reported that 44.6% of their classes
were taught worse, 43.7% were taught about
Table 2
Coding Frequencies for Open-Ended Questions Related to Stress and Coping After Shift to Remote Instruction
What has been most stressful about
the stay-at-home period?
Full sample
(n = 344)
Stress level
decreased
(n = 40)
Stress level
stayed the same
(n = 74)
Stress level
increased
(n = 229)
Self-regulation/motivation 102 9 23 70
Academic/school stressors 86 5 13 68
Home environment 67 3 15 49
Uncertainty/lack of control 43 7 11 25
Social isolation 37 7 7 22
Basic needs (e.g., job, food) 34 3 3 28
Health and safety concerns 31 3 7 21
Loss of opportunities or access 14 2 5 7
Emotional challenges 41 0 3
Nothing 4 3 1 0
Other 11 3 5 3
What has been most helpful for coping
during the stay-at-home period?
Full sample
(n = 341)
Stress level
decreased
(n = 40)
Stress level
stayed the same
(n = 73)
Stress level
increased
(n = 227)
Family/friends 97 10 18 69
Exercise and/or being outdoors 67 5 13 49
Hobbies/leisure 29 4 8 17
Sleep/relaxing 27 2 7 18
Media 26 2 9 14
Professors’ understanding 21 1 5 15
Pets and animals 20 3 5 12
Routine 17 5 4 8
Meditation 13 3 1 9
Autonomy 11 4 2 5
Work 11 5 3 3
Sense of shared struggle 10 0 2 8
Food/cooking 91 1 7
Distractions 70 0 7
Faith 6 1 1 4
Drugs/alcohol 60 1 5
Music 50 1 4
Therapy 40 0 4
Nothing 9 1 4 4
Other 24 4 5 15
6 USHER ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.the same, and 11.7% were taught better compared
to before. Students nevertheless reported that
their instructors were very or somewhat understanding in over 90% of their classes. Students’
responses to the corresponding open-ended questions revealed several patterns.
Two themes emerged most frequently from
students’ responses (n = 160) to the open-ended
question about instructional quality. First, many
students offered evaluative comments related to
instructors’ pedagogical skill and ability to adapt
to online delivery (e.g., use of technology, adapting coursework and assignments). A second and
often related theme addressed communication
between instructors and students. Among the
minority of students who reported that instructional quality had improved after remote instruction, most simply noted that their instructors were
“doing their best” during a “challenging and
difficult” time. Students praised those instructors
who remained accessible to them and kept open
lines of communication.
Similar patterns were reflected in students’
comments about their instructors’ level of understanding. Many students acknowledged that their
instructors’ empathy and care had been important
to them emotionally and motivationally. Care
was conveyed through proactive communication
from instructors and through a willingness to
make instructional or academic accommodations
to ease the shift to remote learning (e.g., leniency
in grading, assignment modifications, and lighter
coursework).
Workload
We asked students specifically about how their
coursework had changed during the shift to
remote instruction. On average, students reported
that the workload had increased in 29.1% of their
classes, remained about the same in 42.4% of
their classes, and decreased in 28.4% of their
classes after the shift to remote instruction.
In terms of how their work had changed, about
one in five participants described changes to
assignments, requirements, or due dates. Most
students said these changes had increased their
workload. As one noted, “in person class time was
replaced with assignments, which in some cases
tripled the amount we were used to before the stay
at home order. Exams were replaced with other
assignments and extra reading/video material was
included along with lectures.” For some, workload-related stress was compounded by the cognitive and emotional burden brought on by the
emerging pandemic.
Nearly 20% of responding participants noted
that their online work was less helpful to their
Table 3
Descriptive Statistics for Students’ Ratings of Course Experiences Following COVID-19 Stay-at-Home Order
Survey Item.
Proportion of courses
M SD Mdn
Instructional quality (n = 322)
Taught worse 44.6% 30.7% 40.0%
Taught about the same 43.7% 30.2% 40.0%
Taught better 11.7% 20.3% .0%
Course workload (n = 320)
Smaller workload 28.4% 28.2% 20.0%
About the same workload 42.4% 30.6% 40.0%
Larger workload 29.1% 27.8% 20.0%
Your own learning (n = 313)
Learned less 51.9% 35.3% 50.0%
Learned about the same 37.7% 32.8% 33.3%
Learned more 10.4% 21.9% .0%
Instructors’ situational understanding (n = 310)
Not at all understanding 8.7% 15.9% .0%
Somewhat understanding 17.8% 23.0% .0%
Very understanding 73.5% 29.0% 80.0%
Courses that included video lectures (n = 306) 55.8% 28.2% 60.0%
Note. Students were asked to allocate the number of courses that fit the descriptors above. Proportions were calculated by
dividing by students’ total number of courses during the Spring 2020 semester.
PSYCHOLOGY STUDENTS’ RESPONSE TO REMOTE INSTRUCTION 7
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.Table 4
Coding Frequencies for Open-Ended Questions Related to Instructional Changes During Shift to Remote
Instruction
How has [the course experience] been since the COVID-19 stay-at-home order took effect (compared to before)?
Quantitative result categories
Half or more
courses
Majority of
courses
Half or more
courses
Instructional quality
All respondents
(n = 160)
Taught worse
(n = 74)
Taught about the
same
(n = 52)
Taught better
(n = 15)
Teacher/teaching quality 55 22 25 2
Communication/clarity 41 16 13 5
Delivery format 40 21 13 2
Support/accommodation 40 12 12 9
Work quantity/quality 35 15 8 5
Other 19 13 4 1
Instructors’ understanding
All respondents
(n = 67)
Not at all
understanding
(n = 4)
Somewhat
understanding
(n = 5)
Very
understanding
(n = 47)
Positive 34 0 1 30
Mixed 19 1 4 9
Negative 14 3 0 8
Empathy/care 26 0 3 19
Academic accommodations 21 0 2 18
Lack of accommodations 14 0 2 9
Lack of empathy/care 11 4 1 4
Good communication/clarity 2 0 0 2
Poor communication/clarity 2 0 0 1
Course workload
All respondents
(n = 94)
Smaller
workload
(n = 21)
About the same
workload
(n = 22)
Larger workload
(n = 29)
Increased workload 38 4 6 19
Mixed workload 10 3 3 1
Same workload 7 2 5 0
Decreased workload 4 3 1 0
Changed assignments/requirements 19 6 5 3
Busy work 17 3 2 6
Difficulty/easiness 6 2 2 0
Less lecture/fewer Meetings 5 2 0 1
Motivation/self-regulation 5 1 1 2
Other 12 3 3 3
Your learning
All respondents
(n = 82)
Learned less
(n = 46)
Learned about
the same
(n = 19)
Learned more
(n = 8)
Learning decreased/was worse 47 33 7 1
Learning stayed same 2 0 1 0
Learning increased/was better 6 0 1 5
Self-regulation/focus/motivation 23 13 5 2
Environment (e.g., access, location) 11 7 2 1
Self-teaching 9 6 2 0
Goal orientation shift 8 4 1 1
Emotions 7 3 2 2
Other 7 4 3 0
8 USHER ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.learning (e.g., “It just felt like the assignments
were all busy work and I was only doing them to
get points and not actually learn”). Even among
students who perceived that their overall workload had decreased, some felt like their remote
class assignments “didn’t contribute to learning
at all.”
Learning
When asked explicitly about their learning,
students reported learning less in most of their
classes (51.9%), about the same in some
(37.7%), and more in a minority of classes
(10.4%) after the shift to remote instruction
compared to before. Students’ open-ended responses revealed that they attributed changes in
their learning, at least in part, to factors such as
low motivation, inability to self-regulate their
learning, and a shift in goals. One student’s
experience touched on many attributional
themes that typified students’ responses: “I literally have no schedule anymore so I can’t plan
when to do anything and I have no motivation
and it’s just terrible.” Motivational and attention
regulation difficulties were often made worse by
environmental constraints (e.g., distractions,
lack of reliable internet, reduced access to campus resources). Online delivery modalities, both
synchronous and asynchronous, were barriers to
learning for many students. On the other hand,
some students attributed the decline in learning
to internal factors, such as their own shifting
goals and priorities.
Several students mentioned feeling unprepared
for the increased personal responsibility of learning remotely. For some, this was viewed as a
challenge (e.g., “The learning has shifted more
towards myself having to take more of an active
role in my own education with no lecture meeting
or structure”). Others, however, seemed resentful
of or frustrated by the lack of learning support. As
this student wrote, “I have never felt more stupid
than I do right now. I feel like I’m teaching
myself, and that’s very much the blind leading
the blind.”
Some more generally attributed their learning
declines to the shift to remote instruction (e.g.,
“I feel that I am losing a lot of valuable knowledge
moving online for classes”) or on their own
beliefs about their capabilities to learn online
(e.g., “I do better in an in-person environment”).
Others felt that instructors’ decisions about delivery modality left them unsupported in their learning, such as when classes did not include
synchronous meetings. A minority of students
reported learning more after the shift to remote
instruction; these students appreciated the
instructional flexibility and self-paced learning.
Lecture Delivery Modality
To learn more about the impact of instructional
delivery decisions on students’ motivation and
learning, we asked students to indicate how many
of their courses included video lectures during
remote instruction and to offer their opinion on
this delivery format. Students reported that, on
Table 4 (continued)
How has [the course experience] been since the COVID-19 stay-at-home order took effect (compared to before)?
Percentage of courses that included video lectures
Lecture delivery modality
All respondents
(n = 87)
<50%
(n = 30)
50%
(n = 11)
>50%
(n = 39)
Positive 47 21 6 18
Mixed 13 4 2 7
Negative 16 3 1 10
Compared to in-person 11 4 0 7
Self-regulated learning 18 3 3 12
Synchronous zoom lecture 21 8 3 10
Asynchronous video lecture 11 1 2 8
Did not use video lecture 5 2 3 0
Teacher/teaching quality 6 1 2 3
Class engagement/interaction 5 1 3 1
Other 6 2 0 1
Note. Table excludes open-ended responses for students who did not answer the corresponding closed-ended responses or for
whom course experiences were highly variable (i.e., no clear experiential trend).
PSYCHOLOGY STUDENTS’ RESPONSE TO REMOTE INSTRUCTION 9
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.average, 55.8% of their courses offered video
lectures delivered synchronously, asynchronously, or both after the transition to online
learning. Over half of the students who provided
more elaborate responses expressed positive opinions of video lectures. Several remarked that
video lectures provided an instructional experience that was most similar to in-person instruction. Others found that video lectures helped
regulate their learning. Conversely, of the students who felt negatively, the majority referenced
struggles with self-regulation, reporting that they
found it difficult to stay focused and attentive
during video lectures.
Students expressed differing opinions about
the merits of synchronous (i.e., “live”) versus
asynchronous lectures, and frequently related
the delivery method to their ability to self-regulate. Some preferred synchronous lectures
because they allow for real-time class discussions
and “help students stay close with their classes
and teachers.” Others preferred the flexibility
afforded by asynchronous lectures. Students similarly appreciated having access to pre-recorded
lectures or lectures that were recorded synchronously and later made available for reviewing
because they could “go back and watch it multiple
times” and “learn at my own pace.”
Students’ mixed opinions about video lectures
also reflected possible variations in teaching
skills across classes (e.g., “It’s very dependent
on the professor quality. Some professors have
perfectly fine lectures, while others are lacking
greatly.”). Students whose instructors were less
skilled in the successful integration of technology
found it harder to pay attention in class. On the
other hand, some students enthusiastically linked
the lecture delivery to their own motivation and
learning (e.g., “Love video lectures. They make
me feel like I am still in the classroom and am
getting the same learning experience as before
COVID-19. [My professor] produced amazing
video lectures, which were extremely beneficial
to my learning.”).
Effect on Students’ Educational Progress
To answer our final research question, we
examined the impact of COVID-19 disruptions
on students’ perceptions about their educational
future. Over one third of students reported feeling
less certain about their career plans following the
shift to remote instruction, but over half reported
that their level of certainty about the future had
not changed. Approximately 85% of the 252
students not graduating in Spring or Summer
of 2020 indicated that they were certain that
they would return for the fall; however, students’
open-ended comments revealed underlying uncertainties about how the pandemic might affect
their progress in college. For example, of the 63
students who left comments, 22.2% noted that
their return would depend on whether the university chose to conduct classes in person versus
online. Some believed that their progress might
be slowed down or would be contingent on the
modality of instruction (e.g., “I know it’s being
done out of the interest of safety, but I feel with
online, my college progress will be delayed or
halted.”). Other students, though fewer in number, felt unable to manage their fear of the pandemic spreading on campus (e.g., “If it switches
to in person, I’ll have to unenroll because the
pandemic is too scary for me to be on a college
campus”).
Discussion
We aimed to investigate how the initial shift to
remote instruction following the COVID-19 outbreak affected the psychological and academic
experiences of undergraduate psychology students, particularly in terms of students’ stress,
motivation, self-regulatory abilities, and learning. Themes emerging from students’ openended response provided texture to students’
survey ratings, which were summarized quantitatively (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2017).
Two thirds of students reported increased
stress, and four out of five reported decreased
motivation for academic work and diminished
capacity to self-regulate (e.g., remaining
focused, regulating attention, establishing routines) after the campus closed to in-person instruction. Experiences of stress during the initial
COVID-19 outbreak were not uncommon across
sectors of society. However, the chief sources of
stress described by over one third of the undergraduate psychology students in our sample were
motivational and self-regulatory in nature. Students struggled with decreased ability to focus
and remain motivated in their courses, which
coincided with increases in overall stress.
Several possible mechanisms may explain the
sudden declines in academic motivation. First,
students’ academic goals may have become
10 USHER ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.less focal than personal goals such as ensuring
their own and their families’ health and safety.
Second, common behavioral reinforcements
(e.g., face-to-face accountability, rigid grading
structures) were modified at the university where
this research took place. For instance, students
had the option of being graded as “pass/fail” in
lieu of receiving a letter grade. As our data
suggest, some students who may have been oriented toward mastery goals (i.e., to learn as must
as possible) before the pandemic reported reorienting toward doing enough to “avoid a failing
grade.” Evidence suggests that the latter goals
(i.e., performance avoidance) may undermine
students’ intrinsic motivation and learning
(Urdan & Kaplan, 2020). Third, students experienced growing doubts about their own capabilities to learn effectively. For some, these doubts
were exacerbated by having to learn challenging
content without typical instructional supports.
Others doubted their capability to learn in an
online environment and amidst distracting circumstances at home.
Self-regulation is an important factor in college students’ academic success and well-being
(Kim et al., 2020; Wolters & Benzon, 2013).
Successful learners establish routines and spend
considerable time and energy structuring their
learning environment to meet their learning
goals. Disruption to this repertoire seemed to
undermine students’ beliefs in their own capabilities to learn and to regulate their circumstances (Zimmerman et al., 2017). The upside
was that many students also reported engaging in
healthy coping strategies, such as spending time
with family and in nature, exercising, and sleeping more (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention [CDC], 2020). Taken together, these
findings suggest that multifaceted educational
efforts are needed to support students’ behavioral and psychological self-regulation during
this moment.
A second focus of this study was to gauge
students’ perceptions about how their courses
were taught during the shift to remote instruction.
Almost 75% of students felt that most of their
instructors had been “very understanding” of
their challenges during the semester when
COVID-19 began to spread. Students expressed
their appreciation for their professors’ efforts to
help them navigate changes in their courses and
lives—no small feat given that faculty were
certainly also burdened by the multiple stressors
of the moment. Had this level of support not been
available, coping with the challenges of the pandemic would have been far more difficult.
Nevertheless, approximately half of the students in our sample reported that the instructional
quality and their own learning declined in the
majority of their courses after the switch to remote
instruction. Only a small number of students
thought that their instructors adjusted well to
teaching effectively in the remote learning context. This is understandable in light of reports that
two thirds of nearly 800 U.S. higher education
faculty and administrators surveyed in April of
2020 reported having no online teaching experience, and over half reported having to learn new
methods to use in their teaching (Johnson et al.,
2020). In addition, 64% of faculty reported having made mid-semester changes to their course
assignments or exams, and about half said they
had lowered their expectations about the amount
of work students would do. Any one of these
instructional shifts would likely have had downstream effects on students’ perceptions of instructional quality, learning, and workload. Had we
exclusively relied on students’ quantitative ratings, we may have simply concluded that emergency instructional shifts inevitably affected the
quality of students’ education.
However, open-ended responses painted a
more complex picture of the myriad factors
affecting students’ learning experiences. Our
data showed that personal factors (e.g., motivation, lack of focus) both affected and were
affected by the changes in students’ perceptions
of their learning environment. For example, in
their written responses, many students attributed
declines in their learning to their own waning
motivation and to self-regulatory challenges they
were facing. On the other hand, they described
ways in which the instructional quality in their
classes might be altered to support their motivation and engagement. The latter led to several
areas of recommendation for improving the
teaching of psychology, and, in turn, support
students’ motivation and self-regulation during
challenging times.
When they perceive their teachers’ instructional quality as good, students are more likely
to strive for a deep understanding in their learning
(Lizzio et al., 2002). In contrast, a heavy workload with assignments that students have trouble
seeing as relevant may lead students to take only a
surface approach to learning. Another implication
PSYCHOLOGY STUDENTS’ RESPONSE TO REMOTE INSTRUCTION 11
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.to emerge is that flexibility is important to students
during this time. Although students varied in
terms of their preferences for synchronous and
asynchronous delivery formats, most seemed to
appreciate the ability to re-watch lectures at will.
Many students also seemed to find that at least
some degree of live interactions with their instructors and peers enhanced their motivation. Increasing regular communication may be particularly
useful for helping students stay on track in online
classes (see Online Learning Resource Center,
2020). Departmental- or institutional-level efforts
to improve the instructional environment are also
needed to assist both instructors and students as
they adapt to remote learning (Anderson, 2004).
We were encouraged to find that the psychology students who took part in this study displayed
a robust intention to persist in completing their
college degree. However, nearly a quarter of
students stated that their return was dependent
on how the institution would plan to reopen in the
fall semester. Many stated they would not return
unless they could do so in-person. At the time of
this writing, postsecondary institutions are still in
flux as to how they will deliver instruction in
2020–2021 (see The College Crisis Initiative @
Davidson College, 2020). Furthermore, a Pew
Research Center survey conducted in the fall of
2020 has shown that most Americans believe that
online classes do not provide an educational
experience of comparable value with in-person
classes (Parker et al., 2020). The long-term effects of remote instructional delivery on psychology majors are still unknown. The COVID-19
pandemic has introduced a new set of stressors
into students’ lives as they navigate college
course loads while adapting to new campus
and societal norms. Students’ persistence may
also be negatively associated with their familial
obligations, such as helping to take care of family
members or needing to contribute financially
(Witkow et al., 2015). Current circumstances
underscore the recent call for undergraduate
psychology courses to address students’ personal
development directly in the curriculum throughout this crisis (Bachik & Kitzman, 2020).
Researchers should continue to assess how
new personal and institutional realities might
influence students’ matriculation in the major.
As instructors have time to design and implement
better lessons via remote or hybrid delivery formats, some may elect to adopt these new approaches for the longer term. Similarly, as the
pandemic wanes, students will be better informed
about how their courses will be delivered and able
to prepare for learning across delivery modalities.
These adaptations may lead to significant changes
in the college experience—and social and academic outcomes—for psychology students and
their peers in other disciplines. This study can
serve as a baseline for ongoing investigation.
Limitations and Future Directions
Although this research revealed a rich depiction of psychology undergraduates’ lives after the
shift to remote instruction caused by the COVID19 pandemic, several limitations bear noting.
First, our sample, though representative of psychology students at one university, was predominantly female and White. As COVID-19 has
disproportionately affected people of color, especially Black and Latinx individuals who comprised too small a proportion of our data to
meaningfully analyze separately, it is essential
that future research more fully represent the
experiences of racially and ethnically minoritized
individuals (Stokes et al., 2020). Furthermore,
our sample is limited to those who had access
to reliable internet service at the end of the
semester and may therefore not represent the
experiences of students who experienced more
severe disruptions to basic needs and access.
Second, we descriptively investigated students’ behavioral and psychological changes,
course experiences, and progress in college.
Although the students’ descriptions point to the
psychological and educational impacts of the
pandemic, we cannot draw causal inferences
between the research variables. Moreover, the
cross-sectional design of our study prevents
causal inferencing, and all data analyzed in the
study were self-reported by students. However,
the use of mixed methods increases the conclusion validity of our findings, as we were able to
triangulate and contextualize students’ responses
to closed-ended questions by examining their
corresponding open-ended responses.
Third, this research was conducted in Spring
2020 semester during the emergency phase of the
pandemic. We agree with the recent editorial
comment in Teaching Sociology that “emergency
remote instruction is not the same as online
learning” (Kozimor, 2020, p. 181). The experiences students reported having in their psychology and related courses were not taught under
12 USHER ET AL.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.ideal circumstances. Most courses were not intentionally designed to be delivered as they were.
Student perceptions and instructor behaviors
were both likely influenced by many external
stressors—some traumatic—and by the uncertainties of how long the COVID-19 stay-athome order would be in effect.
Despite these caveats, we agree with the social
cognitive premise that, quite often, yesterday’s
perceptions and experiences frame tomorrow’s
perceptions and behaviors. We believe the experiences shared by psychology students in 2020 will
be the rules by which they act as they move
forward in their educational careers and can therefore be instructive for ongoing pedagogical decisions. Many colleges have fluid plans in place that
would result in immediate shifts between course
formats in response to local changes in COVID-19
infection rates. In this regard, further examinations
are needed to document how these shifts affect
students in the short and long term. Relationships
between course delivery formats, students’ learning experiences, motivation, self-regulation, and
achievement in college can be more fully investigated in future studies. Including measures of
instructor perceptions would also enrich this work.





NEW PAPER




J. Clin. Psychol. 2020;76:1173–1185. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jclp © 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC | 1173
DOI: 10.1002/jclp.22969
COMMENTARY
Rapid telepsychology deployment during the
COVID‐19 pandemic: A special issue
commentary and lessons from primary care
psychology training
Paul B. Perrin1 | Bruce D. Rybarczyk1 | Bradford S. Pierce1 |
Heather A. Jones1 | Carla Shaffer1 | Leila Islam2
1
Department of Psychology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia
2
Department of Psychiatry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia
Correspondence
Paul B. Perrin, Health Psychology, Departments
of Psychology, Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Box 842018, Richmond, VA
23284‐2018.
Email: pperrin@vcu.edu
Funding information
Health Resources and Services Administration,
Grant/Award Numbers: D40HP33378,
M01HP31388
Abstract
Objective: This article positions the special issue on telepsychology amidst the COVID‐19 pandemic, which has
dramatically accelerated the adoption and dissemination
of telepsychology.
Method: The article makes general observations about the
themes emerging in the special issue with considerations for
application, training, theory‐driven research, and policy. It
then presents as a case example the rapid deployment
during the pandemic of telepsychology doctoral training and
services at the Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU)
Primary Care Psychology Collaborative.
Results: Facilitators to VCU telepsychology deployment
included trainee and supervisor resources, strong telepsychology training, and prior experience. Barriers to
overcome included limited clinic capacity, scheduling,
technology, and accessibility and diversity issues. Lessons
learned involved presenting clinical issues, supervision,
and working with children and adolescents.
Conclusions: Telepsychology is crucial for psychological
service provision, during the COVID‐19 pandemic morethan ever, and that is unlikely to change as psychologists
and patients increasingly continue to appreciate its value.
KEYWORDS
COVID‐19, integrated care, primary care psychology, telehealth,
telemedicine, telepsychology, training
1 | INTRODUCTION
Our commentary to this Journal of Clinical Psychology special issue on “Telepsychology: Research, Training, Practice,
and Policy” has several purposes. We begin by making general observations about some of the themes emerging in
the special issue with considerations for application, training, theory‐driven research, and policy. We then position
telepsychology amidst the backdrop of the COVID‐19 pandemic, which arguably is a historical event that has had
the largest impact on the provision of telepsychology services since the invention of the webcam. The article will
present as a case example the rapid deployment during the pandemic of telepsychology doctoral training and
services at the Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) Primary Care Psychology Collaborative, which is funded
by two grants from the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) and at any given time trains over
30 psychology doctoral students across a dozen or so primary care psychology training sites. The article will focus
on the changes being made at VCU to adapt from in‐person services and training to telepsychology, successes, and
supports in that adaptation, barriers encountered, and lessons learned for telepsychology training and service
provision.
2 | TELEPSYCHOLOGY SPECIAL ISSUE
More than any other theme, the articles in this special issue underscore the critical nature of strong telepsychology
training as a growth opportunity for the field. Pierce, Perrin, and McDonald (2020) found in their path model that
the strongest predictors of psychologists' use of telepsychology were subjective norms, perceived ease of use, and
perceived usefulness of telepsychology. Put simply, psychologists who do not use telepsychology do not feel that
others are using it or that it is easy to use or useful. For these nearly 80% of psychologists, this has to change, and
the primary way to do it is through strong telepsychology training implemented for trainees both early and often in
their training, as well as practicing psychologists at various phases of their careers. Indeed, lack of training was the
most frequently endorsed barrier to telepsychology use among mental health care providers (Perry, Gold, &
Shearer, 2020). Caver et al. (2020) describe some of the excellent telepsychology training programing offered by
the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and the VA's strong efforts to overcome barriers to training and
implementation. The VA is at the forefront of efforts to support telepsychology provision. Dissemination and
implementation (D&I) science is sorely needed in this arena to determine what variables have facilitated the D&I of
telepsychology and telemedicine within the VA and other technologically progressive health care systems, as well
as to apply those findings to other systems and settings.
In the opening editorial, Elliott (2020) identifies another of the most substantial barriers to the adoption of
telepsychology: ourselves. Psychologists' bias against telepsychology can at times be profound, yet that bias runs
counter to the overwhelming evidence suggesting that telepsychology is no less effective than in‐person treatment
for the vast majority of presenting concerns (Varker, Brand, Ward, Terhaag, & Phelps, 2019) and that it can be an
excellent extension to in‐person services such as aiding in assessment (Heesacker, Perez, Quinn, & Benton, 2020).
Some seemingly obvious exceptions to this general rule may apply for specific clinical services, such as
1174 | PERRIN ET AL.neuropsychological assessment, although evidence is mounting that certain neuropsychological assessments can
feasibly be administered through telepsychology (Galusha‐Glasscock, Horton, Weiner, & Cullum, 2016).
Telepsychology trainings and readings have to spend substantial time countering preconceived biases and educating psychologists and trainees that telepsychology works and how it can extend in‐person services (Pierce
et al., 2020). Theory‐driven intervention research in this area would identify what barriers are present for
psychologists (e.g., Perry et al., 2020), as well as exactly what types of information and experiences effectively help
psychologists with strong biases against telepsychology overcome them.
Although psychologists sometimes voice negative views about telepsychology, our field has known for a long
time that many potential patients have negative views about traditional psychological treatment. Ironically, telepsychological approaches such as wearable devices may actually be more appealing to people holding negative
views toward psychological treatment and who have less experience in help‐seeking (Hunkin, King, & Zajac, 2020).
Other extremely promising web‐based approaches that have the potential to reach individuals not entering traditional treatment, or as a supplement to traditional treatment, are showcased in this special issue, including
Acceptance and Commitment therapy for college students (Viskovich & Pakenham, 2020), an avatar‐based intervention for military family caregivers (Wilcox, 2020), and a self‐management positive psychology intervention
(Görges, Oehler, von Hirschhausen, Hegerl, & Rummel‐Kluge, 2020). As Heesacker et al. (2020) note, web‐based
interventions such as these are showing respectable levels of feasibility and efficacy, although treatment computerization represents an extension of traditional mental health care providers, not a replacement.
Despite many of the intrapsychologist variables highlighted in the articles in this special issue that limit the D&I
of telepsychology (e.g., bias, lack of preparedness, concerns about usefulness or efficacy), a substantial portion of
barriers exist in the external environment, many of which have come to the forefront during the COVID‐19
pandemic, as noted in more detail below. One of the most substantial is psychologist reimbursement issues, which
are far less present in the VA and probably account in part for telepsychology and telemedicine's relative success
there. Few private insurance companies reimburse for telepsychology services at the same rate as in‐person
services, or at all. Federal legislation is critical mandating that insurance companies' reimbursement policies align
with the comparative outcome effectiveness of telepsychology and in‐person treatment. Further, widespread
adoption of interstate practice agreements in the United States are necessary for the full success of telepsychology,
such as the Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact (PSYPACT), which facilitates telepsychology practice across
jurisdictional boundaries. In most states, both the psychologist and patient have to be physically in the state in
which the psychologist is licensed. By contrast, a licensed psychologist working at a VA medical center can treat a
veteran in any other state, again showing the VA's forward thinking on these issues and the potential for public
policy to expand the reach of telepsychology.
3 | COVID‐19 PANDEMIC
It could not be more fortuitous that this special issue was scheduled to go to print amidst the COVID‐19 pandemic,
which has dramatically altered the telepsychology and telemedicine landscape in the United States and in other
global regions. The World Health Organization (WHO) was informed on December 31, 2019 that several cases of
pneumonia of unknown etiology were detected within China's Hubei province (WHO, 2020a). On January 7, 2020,
Chinese health authorities announced they had identified and isolated a new type of coronavirus (i.e., 2019‐nCoV,
COVID‐19, or coronavirus) associated with the cluster of detected respiratory infections within Wuhan city. Five
days later, China shared the genetic sequence for the virus with other countries to develop diagnostic testing. By
January 20, a total of 282 cases of COVID‐19 had been detected across China, Thailand, Japan, and the Republic of
Korea (WHO, 2020a).
On January 19, a 35‐year‐old male entered an urgent care clinic within Washington State after several days of
coughing, nausea, and a fever. Before seeking treatment, he had been visiting family in Wuhan, China and had
PERRIN ET AL. | 1175returned to the United States. On the following day, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
confirmed that the man's nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs had tested positive for COVID‐19 (Holshue
et al., 2020). By the end of February, 85,403 COVID‐19 cases had been confirmed globally, with 62 total cases
confirmed within the United States (WHO, 2020b). On March 11, 2020, the director of the WHO announced that
they had characterized the COVID‐19 virus as a pandemic (WHO, 2020d).
During crisis‐related surges in health care needs, effective strategies have been developed to help patients and
communities manage acute stress, preserve medical supplies, and maintain the mental and physical health of
patients and health care staff (Tadmor, McManus, & Koenig, 2006). For example, in anticipation of higher demand,
and to decrease the risk of virus transmission between individuals, the CDC and the American College of Surgeons
(ACS) recommended that health care providers postpone elective procedures and routine patient visits (ACS, 2020;
CDC, 2020). As projections revealed major metropolitan areas had insufficient capacity to meet anticipated
demand, temporary health care facilities were established in public spaces such as the New Orleans Convention
Center (The Associated Press, 2020), New York's Javits Center (Lardieri, 2020), and Central Park (Torres, 2020).
Also, the hospital ships United States Naval Ship (USNS) Comfort and USNS Mercy were deployed to New York and
Los Angeles to serve patients without the virus (Correll, 2020; U.S. Naval Institute, 2020).
Based on the speed of transmission and delayed onset of symptoms of COVID‐19, the WHO strongly recommended physical distancing between individuals (WHO, 2020c) to avoid overwhelming health care infrastructure.
Guided by this, large gatherings were canceled, many schools shifted to web‐based learning, companies adopted
telecommuting for employees (Adalja, Toner, & Inglesby, 2020), and health care organizations greatly expanded their
use of telehealth (Nitkin, 2020; Stiepan, 2020; VHA, 2020). The need for physical distancing during the pandemic
comes at a psychological cost for communities. There exists a rich body of literature revealing a relationship between
social support and mental health (Harandi, Taghinasab, & Nayeri, 2017). Catastrophes and disasters are associated
with higher levels of psychological distress, depression, anxiety, panic, posttraumatic stress disorder, and interpersonal problems in affected communities (Norris, Friedman, & Watson, 2002; Norris, Friedman, Watson, Byrne,
et al., 2002). Furthermore, the stress and anxiety that communities experience during periods of heavy media
coverage of a disease have been associated with a surge in patient volume within emergency departments several
days before the actual arrival of an epidemic within the community (McDonnell, Nelson, & Schunk, 2012). Physicians
have also reported experiencing distress and psychological trauma after being forced to make difficult ethical
decisions about the allocation of resources during the COVID‐19 pandemic (Shurkin, 2020).
3.1 | National deployment of telemedicine amidst COVID‐19
This troubling mix of isolation and psychological distress makes it vital for psychologists to have flexible options for
treating patients and communities. As noted in this special issue, the use of telepsychology and telemedicine can
enable skilled providers of mental and physical health care quickly to shift their focus to the locations where they
are needed the most at any given time. It allows them to treat people in areas that may be difficult or dangerous to
travel to, or would limit productive time if they were required to travel in person to multiple sites (Darkins, 2016;
Tadmor et al., 2006). Telepsychology also provides an opportunity for psychologists in rural areas to contribute to
the surge capacity of larger communities during a crisis (Tadmor et al., 2006).
Recognizing several longstanding impediments to telepsychology's and telemedicine's adoption, agencies
within the U.S. government quickly pivoted on multiple policies, unleashing telepsychology's and telemedicine's
ability to play an important role in delivery or care during the COVID‐19 pandemic. On March 16, 2020, the
“in‐person” requirement set forth by the Ryan Haight Act was suspended indefinitely, allowing practitioners to
prescribe Schedule II–V controlled substances as long as the exam occurred using a two‐way, audio‐visual, real‐time
communication system (U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration Diversion Control Division, 2020). Additionally,
Medicare and Medicaid temporarily increased access to care by allowing psychologists, licensed clinical social
1176 | PERRIN ET AL.workers, physicians, and nurse practitioners to be reimbursed for telepsychology and telemedicine visits with
patients across the country, including within patients' homes, and at the same rates as in‐person visits (U.S. Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2020). The American Psychological Association advocated for reimbursement
parity for telepsychology sessions conducted by phone only (DeAngelis, 2020). The Department of Health and
Human Services' Office for Civil Rights (OCR) also temporarily waived the HIPAA Security and Privacy Rule
requirements that had previously prevented the use of common communications apps such as FaceTime and Skype
(U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Office for Civil Rights, 2020a, 2020b). These important changes in
response to the global emergency highlighted the numerous, long‐standing obstacles to telepsychology and telemedicine adoption that have resulted from policies and regulations within the United States.
In response to unprecedented public demand for their services, telepsychology and telemedicine providers
such as Doctor on Demand, Teladoc, and American Well began recruiting psychologists and physicians as demand
outstripped their current capacity (Pifer, 2020). Unfortunately, the increased video conferencing and streaming
services demands pushed the limits of the infrastructure and personnel that support the Internet. Ookla, a company
that monitors and provides network speed reports, observed diminished global network speeds and higher latency
levels during March, 2020 (Ookla, 2020). Atlas, a virtual private network (VPN) provider, reported a 53% increase
in VPN usage during the second week of March in comparison to the previous week (Atlas, 2020). As a result, this
made telepsychology and telemedicine adoption more difficult. For example, VA employees experienced problems
with very slow data transfer rates and network instability. This made it difficult for patients, psychologists, and
physicians trying to leverage the VA's VideoConnect telemedicine platform (Tahir, 2020), laying bare some of the
technological challenges still present in the use of telemedicine.
4 | PRIMARY CARE PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING AT VCU
Amidst this ever‐shifting pandemic, psychologists and psychology training sites across the United States scrambled
both to continue and adapt their services and training models. For over a decade, VCU has had a training model
built on placing psychology doctoral students in integrated care settings. The VCU Primary Care Psychology
Training Collaborative (PCPTC; see pcpsych.vcu.edu) began in 2008 as an initiative to train psychologists to meet
the national workforce demand for psychologists trained to work in integrated primary care in what was then a
newly emerging specialty area of integrated behavioral health. The unique competencies in delivery of this type of
service include interdisciplinary collaboration, provision of brief problem‐focused interventions for both mental
health and health behavior concerns, briefer and less frequent sessions, and flexibility for accepting same‐day
handoffs from other providers. Integrated care is widely recognized as a particularly important care model for
reducing mental health disparities by minimizing barriers and enhancing access in underserved populations where
mental health services are otherwise limited. HRSA has been funding training programs in integrated primary care
because doing so meets their dual mission of filling the health care gap for underserved populations with trainee‐
provided services and developing a workforce who have the skills and motivation to serve these communities. The
VCU PCPTC has been continuously funded by HRSA since 2008 and has funded over 100 trainees who provided
more than 18,000 sessions of pro bono care during that time. Currently, we operate in 12 different adult and
pediatric safety‐net clinics in the community, have 5 faculty supervisors, 17 funded doctoral trainees, and another
15 more junior practicum trainees. The clinics we partner with run the gamut from large university‐based training
clinics primarily serving low‐income patients to smaller free clinics that operate with private funding and a
workforce of volunteer clinicians to supplement a limited number of paid staff. Two of our partners are clinics
which have their own in‐house mental health clinics, with one being a large federally funded clinic serving individuals who are at risk for homelessness.
The services provided by our trainees address a wide range of issues in both children and adults, including
mental health concerns such as depression, anxiety, anger management, anxiety, depression, grief, neurocognitive
PERRIN ET AL. | 1177screenings, parent‐child relationship issues, postpartum depression, psychosis screenings, risk assessment of potential harm to self or others, stress management, and trauma‐informed care. Common health behavior issues that
are addressed include adjustment to chronic medical conditions, diabetes management, chronic pain, insomnia,
smoking cessation, substance use, and weight loss. The overall focus is on equipping future psychologists with the
skills to work in the fast‐paced world of primary care psychology, providing first‐line behavioral health services in
the same place where patients receive their routine medical care. These patients in general face a wide array of
environmental stressors and traumatic experiences (Baylor Williams et al., 2019), having received either inadequate or no behavioral health services in the past. Studies have shown that the brief services delivered by our
team are effective in reducing anxiety and depression (Sadock, Perrin, Grinnell, Rybarczyk, & Auerbach, 2017) and
reducing preventable hospitalizations (Lanoye et al., 2017).
5 | TELEPSYCHOLOGY DEPLOYMENT AT VCU AMIDST COVID‐19
Very shortly into the COVID‐19 pandemic, it became apparent that our large network of in‐person integrated care
training and service provision was not going to be viable. Though this eventually turned out to be true across the
board nationally among integrated care professionals, once social distancing became the norm, it was more apparent in the early going of our training because of the fact that all of our clinicians are trainees, who are students
first and clinicians second. That creates a different calculus about risk considerations for the clinicians, especially in
light of the differential power that trainees have, which limits their perceived ability to express safety concerns to
their supervisors, who serve as gatekeepers to their entry into the profession.
Unfortunately, many of the unique strategic advantages of integrated primary care psychology turned into
disadvantages in the context of the pandemic and quarantine. Sharing clinic space, conference rooms, and exams
rooms with physicians and their acutely ill patients became a hazard for both the psychology trainees and the
patients who were going to a primary care clinic solely for their mental health visit or staying for a second longer
period when combining visits, thereby increasing their potential exposure. What in normal times is a highly effective way to reduce mental health disparities for low‐income or racial/ethnic minority patients, in this situation
put those populations at even greater risk by having those treatments occur in a medical environment, often
necessitating traveling on public transportation, creating even more risk exposure. Furthermore, a high percentage
of patients in safety‐net settings have multiple chronic health conditions, making them more vulnerable to the life‐
threatening complications of COVID‐19. Of note, a large portion of our safety‐net patients are Black/African
American, and the early data are demonstrating that this group may be disproportionately affected by COVID‐19
(Ahmed, Ahmed, Pissarides, & Stiglitz, 2020).
5.1 | Facilitators of telepsychology deployment
For all these reasons, our faculty supervisors made the decision in the early going of the pandemic to begin an
immediate transition to telepsychology services across all of our 12 primary care training sites. We were aware it
was going to be a large undertaking because of the large number of clinics, each with its own culture and response
to COVID‐19, but we had several advantages going for us. First, we are a very large program with 17 funded
trainees and five faculty supervisors funded for part of their time. With mandated in‐person clinical work suspended immediately (by the both the clinics and the university) and our university closed for 2 weeks, we were able
to bring to bear a tremendous amount of person power toward drafting the start‐up plans. That allowed us to have
separate teams for each site to establish new procedures for contacting, consenting, and scheduling patients who
were shifting to exclusive telepsychology services. Second, because one of our HRSA‐funded grants had mandated
that we add a telepsychology service and training program that we had been working on for 6 months, we were
1178 | PERRIN ET AL.already moving toward the training and policy changes necessary for the delivery of telepsychology. Third, we were
able to leverage the online training created by our university clinic for their transition to telepsychology services.
Each student was required to complete this self‐guided online training before seeing their first telepsychology
patient. Last, we were fortunate enough to have several faculty supervisors with substantial prior experience as
telepsychology clinicians, and in one instance, robust research and grant‐related experience in the area of
telepsychology.
5.2 | Challenges in telepsychology deployment
5.2.1 | Limited clinic capacity
As we made our rapid transition to telepsychology, we needed to adjust to the unique parameters of each site.
Therefore, supervisors collaborated with key personnel at individual sites (e.g., medical directors, head nurses, head
administrators) to identify site‐specific changes to our procedures. For example, some sites provided the administrative support to reach already scheduled patients to inform them of our move to telepsychology, whereas
others preferred for our team to take the lead in contacting patients. Similarly, while all of our clinics had electronic
medical records that could be accessed remotely, some sites did not have the capacity for us remotely to enter
appointments into their scheduling system, and thus we had to create our own password‐protected and encrypted
schedules. Those schedules were then shared with the medical staff so they could add a patient as needed and
know which patients had attended telepsychology appointments.
The fundamental premise of primary care psychology is to provide brief services to as wide a cross‐section of
patients as possible, aiming to improve the behavioral health of the entire clinic population. To achieve the promise
of this population‐based approach to primary care, a steady flow of referrals from physicians and/or routine
screenings are needed. However, nationally and within our primary care clinics as well, there was a dramatic
cutback in primary care visits, especially visits aimed at chronic conditions, routine check‐ups, or prevention.
Furthermore, our free clinic partners that rely on part‐time volunteers to provide a percentage of their care had to
furlough many of those volunteers for safety reasons. Seeing fewer patients leads to fewer referrals. Additionally,
with our primary care colleagues in medicine embarking on their own steep learning curve to shifting to telehealth,
some of our clinicians lost bandwidth they usually have to discuss behavioral health issues with their patients.
Lastly, without our physical presence in their workspace, our medical colleagues did not have the usual visual
reminders or verbal prompts from our clinicians asking for referrals. This sudden drop‐off in referrals was experienced across the spectrum of integrated care providers nationally, who were weighing in daily on listservs
about their challenges with similar transitions in integrated care.
5.2.2 | Scheduling
Another advantage of the integrated care model is being able to schedule medical and behavioral health/psychology appointments back to back. This decreases barriers such as transportation and efficiency in taking time off
from work or finding child care. But with telepsychology, this actually poses a greater challenge in some cases. With
some medical appointments still taking place in person, patients were not in a private space right before or after
their appointment but entering or leaving the clinic, making it difficult to “attend” their telepsychology
appointment.
While no‐shows are generally less common with telepsychology, patients can sometimes take the clinician's
time for granted and can attach less importance to sessions where they do not have to make the investment of
showing up in person. Patients were not always “available” at the time of their appointment. In one case, a woman's
PERRIN ET AL. | 1179partner answered the phone and shared her message that she was getting her nails done and was not available.
Other times, patients had been sleeping, had just woken up and engaged in the session in bed, were eating during a
session, or spent the initial few minutes of the session trying to find a quiet location within their residence. The
latter was especially challenging for patients with children or roommates. Given the greater possibility for unexpected disruptions to plans, it was not uncommon for patients to ask our clinicians to call back at a later time.
5.2.3 | Technology
Another challenge in rolling out telepsychology services was getting patients to feel comfortable using videoconferencing services. Initially, most of our telepsychology visits were conducted via telephone, due to patient
preference and concerns about using an unfamiliar technology. As one integrated care professional concluded after
surveying his colleagues about how many clinicians were finding this same challenge, despite all of our efforts to set
up videoconferencing the telephone is still king. As a result of this trend, our therapists were having to learn to
navigate telepsychology sessions relying solely upon verbal cues (e.g., tone of voice).
Even with this initial bias toward choosing telephone services, we continued to push toward providing more
and more services via Zoom videoconferencing, for the obvious advantages it affords in communication and rapport
building. Another barrier was also the comfort level of the trainees, as the phone in some ways was an easier
adjustment, and the thought of walking a patient through navigating Zoom felt like an additional hurdle. As our
trainees became more confident in telepsychology delivery, they also became more comfortable in selling this
upgraded service. Also, as patients begin using video service with other health care providers and even for social
visits with family and friends during this extended period of social distancing, we are anticipating they will feel more
comfort with this technology.
5.2.4 | Accessibility and diversity issues
Our primary care psychology team contended with a number of accessibility and diversity challenges in the
provision of telepsychology services to the marginalized communities with whom we work. We had difficulty
reaching some patients, and many did not recognize the masked or “blocked” phone number calling them.
Others did not have voicemail systems set up or had full voicemail boxes. Accessibility concerns, such as
restricted data for video telepsychology calls and limited use left on prepaid phones also constrained patients'
ability to engage in telepsychology. Furthermore, a subset of patients were undocumented immigrants or had
undocumented family members, and we recognize that they may not have wanted to show on video their
location during a telepsychology call. Similarly, patients and their families may not have wanted to show their
homes on video either. By contrast, many patients were very open to telepsychology delivered via telephone if
they had concerns about video.
As another inclusion‐related challenge, we realized that we needed to translate our telepsychology informed
consent script into Spanish. Some of the clinics with whom we work did not have reliable translation services during
this time, and therefore, our Spanish‐speaking doctoral trainees were providing care for those patients and their
families who needed sessions in Spanish. Thus, we had our team of Spanish‐speaking clinicians translate and back‐
translate our consent script, with their bilingual supervisor checking their work. Finally, as is true across the nation,
many low‐income families include adults who were essential workers (e.g., in construction, food service, nursing).
Thus, we found that our patients’ families were having to balance trying keep each other safe from any possible
contamination when that person returned home, which, in turn, was contributing to the stress level of our patients
and their families.
1180 | PERRIN ET AL.5.3 | Lessons learned in the telepsychology transition
5.3.1 | Presenting issues
Though we anticipated that patients would be primarily focused on COVID‐19 once we resumed services, many
were ready to “get back to work” on their primary issues and were not as focused on the pandemic as we had been
anticipating. For new referrals, however, a primary driver was often the current pandemic (anxiety, panic attacks,
worry about COVID‐19 risk, etc.). Common stressors for our lower‐income patients included loss of employment,
or being furloughed, and financial strain. The increased presence of children in the home was stressful for some
families. Many of our patients also had chronic health conditions and had been worried about being more vulnerable to the worst COVID‐19 outcomes. In addition, some of our patients included those without consistent
housing or food sources, and one reported being homeless and living out of their car. They worried about the risk of
a total shutdown (e.g., not being allowed to be on the street at all, even in their car) and being unable to find shelter.
Even when working on the primary behavioral health issues that preceded the pandemic, there were new
twists and problems that were exacerbated. Of significant concern was the exacerbation of intimate partner
violence as a result of the additional risk factors associated with being unable to leave the home as often and
increased stress. For our patients with substance use and depression particularly, discussing engaging in behavior
substitutions and enjoyable or pleasurable activities was especially difficult with the stay‐at‐home orders.
Individuals who were trying to quit smoking often found themselves returning to a higher level of smoking.
Similarly, individuals who were working on a plan to lose weight by reducing calorie consumption and increasing
exercise tended to have more difficulty adhering to those plans.
It became clear that our underserved patients with chronic conditions were being dissuaded by social distancing policies and the crisis mode of the medical community from having routine care visits with their physicians
at their primary care clinics. Combined with the reduced availability of other safety‐net services in the community
(e.g., social services, food banks), many of our patients began reporting a feeling that they had been left behind or
deemed a lower priority during the pandemic. Our clinicians noted that patients often expressed relief and gratitude that we continued to be available for our usual level of services—and that we were even more accessible now
that they did not need to travel to the appointment.
We found that a subset of patients actually preferred telepsychology services to the in‐person visits we had
only formerly offered. That meant we were able to reach patients who had previously declined services because of
transportation issues. One partner clinic, in particular, focuses on high utilizing patients who have a high number of
chronic medical conditions (at least seven to qualify for the clinic). Our trainees at that clinic historically had trouble
getting patients to come in for longer, behaviorally focused sessions, and no‐shows were common. After the shift to
telepsychology, the number of appointments soared and no‐shows became a non‐issue. Similarly, another clinic
where the physicians are very invested in making referrals to behavioral health saw an increase in the number of
patients accepting referrals because the barriers became lower for attending these sessions. As a result of this
lesson, we already plan greatly to increase our telepsychology offerings after the pandemic recedes. We have
discussed how it is probably best to have the first session occur in person, where rapport can be built and
assessment instruments can be easily filled out, and then offer to hold future session on the phone or
videoconferencing.
5.3.2 | Supervision
Supervision, which also shifted to strictly telephone or videoconferencing, also had to change substantially. One of
the distinct advantages of integrated primary care is the efficiency of the real‐time formal and informal peer and
team supervision that occurs for trainees. Clinicians often sit in the same space between patient visits and discuss
PERRIN ET AL. | 1181patients among themselves, with the supervisor who is often present on site, and with the medical providers who
also typically sit in the same space. The notes of new referrals are reviewed before the session and there is a
discussion with members of the trainee's “support team” about what approach might be taken. Due to the norms of
primary care, there is also the one‐of‐a‐kind opportunity to interrupt a session to step out for real‐time consultation with peers or other medical providers. All of the advantages were upended by the shift toward a virtual
team with only videoconference contact with the supervisor and other peers and team members.
With trainees operating in more of a silo when delivering care, the antithesis of what is best about integrated
care, we found a need for more supervisor time per trainee and case. We also adapted to this loss of team support
by developing a parallel virtual team meeting before each shift. Trainees connected through Zoom videoconferencing for shift check‐ins at the beginning of each shift, discussing shift responsibilities (e.g., responding to clinic
messages), and ensuring that we followed through with our commitments to each clinic.
Given that the effects of the pandemic were reaching everyone across the world, we knew that our own
graduate student therapists might be experiencing their own challenges. Indeed, there was some initial anxiety
about transitioning so quickly to telepsychology, but that anxiety was generally outweighed by the desire to
provide services to our patients. One strategy, which we feel aided in the transition to telepsychology, was the
gradual start‐up of graduate student therapists delivering telepsychology. We started with our most senior
(fourth‐year) graduate students providing the initial telepsychology services and then started our more junior
therapists. Our staggered training plan allowed the senior graduate student therapists to work through any
wrinkles in the initial plan and to decrease their own anxiety around telepsychology before starting our more
novice trainees. Additionally, it was helpful for our team to discuss the ways in which face‐to‐face and telepsychology provision of services are similar (e.g., teaching a new parenting skill and then having a caregiver
brainstorm how they could use it at home).
5.3.3 | Working with children and adolescents
Delivering telepsychology to a vulnerable population, such as children and adolescents, presented our team with a
unique set of challenges, which compelled our pediatric behavioral health team to make a number of operational
changes, adapting to the shifting service delivery landscape at our medical center. Our first steps in pediatrics were
to check in with our medical team partners, to familiarize ourselves the new policies around pediatric well and sick
visits, and to obtain their feedback on our tentative plan for telepsychology deployment. Generally, our plan was to
offer telepsychology to families referred to us via their pediatrician, with an emphasis on prioritizing those presenting problems that have been a good fit for our behavioral health services thus far: adolescents and young adults
with internalizing concerns (i.e., depression, anxiety) and children with home behavioral concerns. We hypothesized
(and subsequently confirmed) that many of our patients' caregivers who had school‐related concerns would choose
to pause their sessions with us, given the current school closures. For the time being, warm hand‐offs would be
suspended as well. After conferring, our primary care psychology supervisors and medical team leaders (i.e.,
directors of the primary care clinics, nursing, and patient services) approved of the telepsychology plan to continue
the provision of behavioral health services to pediatric patients and that we would check in regularly to discuss
ongoing clinic needs and any feedback about the new pediatric primary care telepsychology services.
With the plan in place, we began to start the roll‐out of telepsychology services. Once their telepsychology
training (detailed above) was complete, our graduate student therapists began calling all patients and their caregivers on our schedule for the upcoming week to inform them that we were moving to a telepsychology model of
care during the pandemic and to gauge their interest in continuing care under this model. Many families were glad
to hear from our team, but felt that behavioral health services for their child was no longer their top priority.
Approximately half of our current patient load decided to continue care with us via telepsychology. Using a
structured consent form, our team obtained and documented verbal informed consent to treat via telepsychology
1182 | PERRIN ET AL.with these families. Thus, our pediatric primary care psychology team delivered telepsychology services to many of
our teens with depression and/or anxiety, which for some, was exacerbated by the COVID‐19 pandemic and the
social distancing and stay‐at‐home orders in our locale. Given the increased amount of time that caregivers and
children were spending together due to school closings, many caregivers felt stressed and in need of stress
management techniques and/or behavioral parent training. Our team also provided those therapeutic strategies via
telepsychology. Additionally, while we had a very structured crisis management plan in place for any acute issues
(e.g., suicidality), we have not yet had to use it. Communication with our medical colleagues went very well. We had
some initial worries about not being colocated in the clinics during this time and losing some of the face‐to‐face
time that had seemed vital to maintaining our presence as team members. However, communication via secure
email as well as the electronic medical records were seamless as we all worked toward the common goal of
providing good family‐centered care.
Despite our successes, there were some barriers to serving our pediatric families via telepsychology. For
instance, as with our adult clinics, our patient load decreased, as many referrals were for school‐based concerns.
Additionally, we were no longer obtaining referrals via warm hand‐offs. Also, there may have been some families
who had other significant concerns (e.g., paying rent, losing their job, taking care of an ill family member). Given that
our patient population is from the communities being hardest hit by COVID‐19 (i.e., low‐income, predominantly
Black/African American families), it is no surprise to us that child behavioral health concerns were not at the top of
the list of priorities for families.
Providing evidence‐based services via telepsychology through our pediatric clinics presented another challenge. It was difficult to have telepsychology sessions with caregivers who had young children, as those children
were often in the room, making noise, needing their caregivers' attention. In clinic, we were able to have a graduate
student therapist assist with childcare; that is not possible with telepsychology. Therefore, we are still navigating
the best ways to provide telepsychology to parents who have more chaotic home environments (e.g., scheduling an
appointment during a child's naptime).
6 | CONCLUSION
As the articles in this special issue and our recent experiences in the rapid transition to telepsychology—as well as
those of the larger field—show, telepsychology is crucial for psychological service provision, now more than ever.
Telepsychology has a demonstrated ability to expand services to underserved and hard‐to‐reach populations, and
its wide applicability makes it extremely well‐suited to become a permanent fixture of our profession, particularly
with the support of strong public policies. The COVID‐19 pandemic and its wake will likely influence daily life of
people across the globe for the foreseeable future, but perhaps one positive and lasting feature is its historic
influence on the D&I of telepsychology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This manuscript was funded in part by awards D40HP33378 (Rybarczyk) and M01HP31388 (Jones) from the
Health Resources and Services Administration.
ORCID
Paul B. Perrin http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2070-215X
Heather A. Jones http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5467-7004




NEW PAPER


ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 18 March 2021
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.571257
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 March 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 571257
Edited by:
Changiz Mohiyeddini,
Oakland University William Beaumont
School of Medicine, United States
Reviewed by:
Rubina Hanif,
Quaid-i-Azam University, Pakistan
Anna Maria Meneghini,
University of Verona, Italy
*Correspondence:
Daniela Marzana
daniela.marzana@unicatt.it
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Health Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 11 June 2020
Accepted: 09 February 2021
Published: 18 March 2021
Citation:
Di Napoli I, Guidi E, Arcidiacono C,
Esposito C, Marta E, Novara C,
Procentese F, Guazzini A, Agueli B,
Gonzáles Leone F, Meringolo P and
Marzana D (2021) Italian Community
Psychology in the COVID-19
Pandemic: Shared Feelings and
Thoughts in the Storytelling of
University Students.
Front. Psychol. 12:571257.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.571257
Italian Community Psychology in the
COVID-19 Pandemic: Shared
Feelings and Thoughts in the
Storytelling of University Students
Immacolata Di Napoli 1
, Elisa Guidi 2
, Caterina Arcidiacono1
, Ciro Esposito1
, Elena Marta3
,
Cinzia Novara4
, Fortuna Procentese1
, Andrea Guazzini 2
, Barbara Agueli 1
,
Florencia Gonzáles Leone1
, Patrizia Meringolo2 and Daniela Marzana3
*
1 Department of Humanities, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy, 2 Department of Education, Literatures, Intercultural
Studies, Languages and Psychology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 3 Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milano,
Italy, 4 Department of Psychology, Educational Science and Human Movement, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy
This study investigated how young Italian people experienced the period of peak spread
of COVID-19 in their country by probing their emotions, thoughts, events, and actions
related to interpersonal and community bonds. This approach to the pandemic will
highlight social dimensions that characterized contextual interactions from the specific
perspective of Community Psychology. The aim was to investigate young people’s
experiences because they are the most fragile group due to their difficulty staying
home and apart from their peers and because they are, at the same time, the most
potentially dangerous people due to their urge to gather in groups. The research involved
568 university students, 475 females, and 93 males, with an average age of 21.82
years (SD = 4.836). The collected data were analyzed with the Grounded Theory
Methodology, using the Atlas 8.0 software. From the textual data, representative codes
were defined and grouped into 10 categories, which reflect the individuals’ prosocial
attitudes, behaviors, and values. These categories formed three macro-categories,
called: “Collective Dimensions,” which includes Connectedness, Solidarity, Italian-ness,
Social Problems, and Collective Mourning; “Prosocial Orientation,” which includes Trust
and Hope; and “Collective Values,” which includes Values of Freedom, Respect of Social
Rules, and Civic-Mindedness. All these macro-categories are indicative of the shared
feelings experienced by Italians during the first time of the pandemic. Further practical
implications of these results will be discussed, including a consideration of the risk of
developing distress and improving well-being, as well as promoting preventive behaviors.
Keywords: emotional and action connectedness, solidarity, trust, collective mourning, COVID-19, civicmindedness
INTRODUCTION
This article will examine the perceived burden of the Covid-19 lockdown on the lives of young
people from the specific perspective of Community Psychology.
Lewin (1936) perspective situated this discipline at the boundary between individual and social
events (Amerio, 2000; Kagan et al., 2007; Orford, 2008). Therefore, its hallmark is an ecologicalDi Napoli et al. Italian Community Psychology in the COVID 19 Pandemic
approach capable of analyzing the interplay of individual,
relational, and social experiences (Prilleltensky, 2008; Di Napoli
et al., 2019a).
We examined the COVID-19 lockdown considering
individual emotions and thoughts as well as actions and
significant events of individual life. In our model, we aimed to
detect perceptions and representations of individuals in all their
emotional and cognitive dimensions as well as the events which
influence their experience, together with—for them—significant
actions and behaviors (Arcidiacono, 2016). In line with this, we
propose a narrative setting, capable of depicting their experience
in four individual dimensions (emotions, thoughts, actions,
and events). From the ecological perspective, we considered the
individual domain of feelings and thoughts, that is, we took
a cognitive and emotional perspective. Meanwhile, following
Amerio (2000) and Ajzen and Kruglanski (2019), we considered
actions as the best individual expression of the interaction with
the external world; furthermore, events concern the experiences
that occur around people and are the expression of the contexts
in which people are immersed.
THE LITERATURE
Lewin stated that “groups come into being not only because
of perceived similarity, but because members realize their fates
depend on the fate of the group as a whole” (Lewin, 1948;
Brown, 1988; Townley, 2017). This certainly also applies to
a community. A community can be considered in terms “of
the emotional and psychological connections that exist between
people and the groups they form and the means by which people
communicate the idea of community—it exists through shared
meaning” (Kagan et al., 2007, p. 75).
A community is characterized by the presence of some
collective dimensions such as emotional connectedness and
solidarity, trust, and civic values, and these assume different
meanings as circumstances change. It is worth mentioning
that Walker (2020) emphasizes the role of we-ness and
of the need to create shared ties specifically in times
of emergency.
Emotional Connectedness and Solidarity
In times of crisis and social trauma such as Covid-19, individuals
and families change their relationship with the social world and
the community.
The journal Nature recently published an article on social and
behavioral response to Covid-19 asserting that fighting a global
pandemic requires large-scale cooperation (Van Bavel et al.,
2020). In this pandemic, there are several collectives (for example,
family, community, national, and international) which can make
decisions to cooperate when faced with such an unexpected
social event.
The awareness, fostered by fear (Pulcini, 2002), of being united
with other human beings through the perception of vulnerability
and weakness leads people to feel a renewed desire for bonding
and generates and reinvigorates the desire for community and
the need to organize themselves in forms of shared sociality, in
other words, the need/desire for coexistence and for a sense of
community (Di Maria, 2000; Marta et al., 2016; Procentese and
Gatti, under review).
Recent research showed that sense of community is central
to a program of protecting citizens’ well-being during pandemic
conditions (Lie et al., 2020). Also, O’Neill (2004) stated that,
as in conditions of disaster, the sense of community favors the
protection of communities and that it increases when citizens are
taken into consideration by their community (Lau et al., 2008).
The dimensions of the collective refer to the sense of
community (SoC) defined as that “feeling that the members feel
they belong, to be important to each other and to the group,
a shared trust that the needs of the members can be satisfied
through commitment to be all together” (McMillan and Chavis,
1986, p. 9).
The four fundamental elements that make up the sense of
community are evident in this definition. The first element is
the sense of belonging, which refers to a feeling of being part
of a community and to the experience of emotional security
that derives from this. A second concept involving the sense
of belonging is identification with the community, that is, the
experience of feeling adequate and well-integrated into it. Finally,
the sense of belonging includes the sharing of a system of
symbols, which has the main purpose of initially creating and
then maintaining the sense of community.
The second element that makes up the sense of community
is influence: it is a two-way concept as it is understood
both as influence of the community on members and
vice versa.
The third fundamental element is the integration and
satisfaction of needs, that is, the members’ certainty that their
needs will be met thanks to belonging to the group since within it
there is a sharing of the needs themselves as well as of purposes,
beliefs, and values.
Studies have shown that the psychological sense of community
is an important component in community initiatives. It is
positively related to higher levels of well-being and associated
with pro-social behaviors, civic participation, and promotion of
social capital (Chavis and Wandersman, 1990; Prezza et al., 1999;
Roussi et al., 2006; Pozzi et al., 2014; Ornelas et al., 2019).
In other words, community members who join together
will have better chances of satisfying both their personal and
their collective needs. The fourth and final element is a shared
emotional connection, that is, the presence of strong emotional
bonds between the members.
Coexistence is therefore favored by the sense of community
that is configured as a catalyst for active, shared, and visible social
participation in the entire community of belonging (Chavis and
Wandersman, 1990; Hughey et al., 1999; De Piccoli et al., 2004;
Christens and Lin, 2014).
Literature has effectively confirmed that SoC is associated
with community participation (Florin and Wandersman,
1984; Chavis and Wandersman, 1990; Brodsky, 1996). Both
community participation and SoC are interrelated key factors
that promote community development and improve the chances
that communities will solve problems, enhancing their internal
human resources and promoting social empowerment (Talò
et al., 2014).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 March 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 571257Di Napoli et al. Italian Community Psychology in the COVID 19 Pandemic
Trust
In a pandemic situation, social trust and institutional trust are
very important issues for overcoming the crisis, as literature
has widely demonstrated. Indeed, trust assumes a central role
in the acceptance of recommended measures (Paek et al., 2008;
Vaughan and Tinker, 2009).
Several studies have examined the role of trust during the
H1N1 influenza, highlighting the importance of building public
trust for promoting compliance with recommended behaviors
(Gilles et al., 2011; Prati et al., 2011; Quinn et al., 2013; Freimuth
et al., 2014). Moreover, Van Der Weerd et al. (2011) highlighted
the fact that during the influenza pandemic (H1N1), trust in
institutions increased, but trust does not always assure adherence
to proactive measures. Recently, Sibley et al. (2020) reported
that during the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown, institutional
trust and attitudes toward the nation and the government
increased, as did trust in science, and trust in the police.
Conversely, in Italy, Stanzani (2020) observed that at the end
of the lockdown, institutional trust decreased among Italians, and
they only experienced high levels of trust toward activities carried
out by NGOs.
This is to say that institutional trust (Lewis and Weigert,
1985; Barbalet, 2009; Luhmann, 2018) expresses judgments
about the performance of institutions such as government (e.g.,
Hetherington, 2005).
Moreover, Rönnerstrand (2016) observed that contextual,
generalized trust has been linked to immunization, in line with
the literature that argues that being a trustful individual and
residing in a community characterized by trust among members
influences health and health behavior (Kawachi et al., 1999; Rose,
2000; Hyyppä and Mäki, 2001; Subramanian et al., 2003; Di
Napoli et al., 2019b).
Finally, generalized social trust refers to trust toward
generalized others who are not directly known (Bjørnskov, 2006;
Nannestad, 2008), which occurs when “a community shares a set
of moral values in such a way as to create regular expectations of
regular and honest behavior” (Fukuyama, 1995, p.153).
Furthermore, a recent study (Imai, 2020) conducted among
health workers during the Covid-19 emergency, showed that trust
between organizations and workers is essential for improving
work motivation and social interaction and cooperation.
Civic Values
During a pandemic, the sharing of values has a strong impact on
social shared identities.
Social values play an important role in addressing the
pandemic emergency (Jarynowski et al., 2020), and one’s
individual perception that others share one’s own social values
enhances the adherence to norms and behaviors for curbing the
spread of the virus (Wolf et al., 2020).
Specifically, Flanagan (2003) and Flanagan et al. (2007)
introduced values with respect to civic attitudes: They defined
engagement values to explain the position taken and the relative
importance attributed by people to issues of a social or political
nature. In their view, a constitutive element of civic values is the
experience of group membership together with the experience of
socialization in one’s family and community in general (Sherrod
et al., 2002; Marta et al., 2010; Marzana et al., 2012; Alfieri
et al., 2014). Wolf (2007) conducted a meta-analysis of civic
values and found that civic values are, in order of the most
widely studied to the least: political tolerance, understood as the
desire to extend civil rights to all, even to groups we do not
like; volunteerism, understood as the contribution of one’s time
to support the activities of community organizations; political
knowledge, understood as the awareness of the political system,
current events, and political leaders; social capital, as the extent
to which a person is networked within their community; civic
skills, understood as the experience in and familiarity with
activities used to influence the political process; and patriotism,
understood as a visceral positive connection to one’s country and
respect for its national symbols and rituals.
THE RESEARCH
Giving voice to people and allowing people to express their
needs and desires as well as acquiring awareness about their
world are among the most significant goals of community
psychology (Rappaport, 1995), rooted in Freire’s conscientization
1970 and Martín-Baró’s community actions 1994. It should also
be recalled that in this discipline, well-being is not only an
individual matter; it concerns community interactions and wellbeing (Di Martino et al., 2018; Di Napoli et al., 2019a). Therefore,
social emotional connectedness, community interactions (Prati
et al., 2016, 2020), conviviality (Procentese et al., 2019a,b),
and participation (Albanesi et al., 2015; Cicognani et al., 2015;
Arcidiacono et al., 2016; Churchman et al., 2016; Pozzi et al.,
2017) are social pillars for understanding the psychic life.
They enrich the merely individual dimensions, compounded by
individual emotions and interpersonal relations that act on a
family and friendship level.
Thus, at the onset of COVID-19, we decided to explore these
dimensions in a group of Italian students. Specifically, we were
interested in probing the inner world of young people faced with
this unexpected event.
In line with the discipline’s vision regarding individual wellbeing, we investigated how people express these dimensions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Aims and Scope
The main goal of this study was to acquire information
about the lockdown experience during the pandemic and to
understand its meaning and symbolization at individual, local,
and national levels.
Framed within the community psychology approach, our
interest was to analyze social interactions between individual
and social levels during this time. Therefore, we asked our
participants to talk freely about emotions, thoughts, events, and
actions that they considered significant to share. They were asked
to refer to their own personal experience or to feelings and actions
related to their relatives, friends, or more generally attributed to
this global pandemic.
The aim was to investigate young people’s experience because
they are the most fragile group due to their difficulty staying
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 March 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 571257Di Napoli et al. Italian Community Psychology in the COVID 19 Pandemic
home and apart from their peers and because they are, at the
same time, the most potentially dangerous people due to their
urge to gather in groups. Therefore, storytelling was used as
a tool to collect their stories and to probe their meaning and
symbolization, developing their reflectivity (Esposito et al., 2017;
Salvatore et al., 2018). In fact, in our case, in line with the mission
of community psychology to give voice to young people, among
the most affected people by the pandemic’s social implications, we
asked our students to freely express their thoughts and emotions
related to their lockdown experience.
Two companion papers will carefully describe their online
teaching experience (Novara et al., forthcoming) and their
individual feelings and thoughts (Marzana et al., forthcoming;
Migliorini et al., 2021).
Here our aim is to probe emotional connectedness and shared
actions undertaken by people during the lockdown.
Participants
The recruitment of the participants took place through the
mediation of lecturers in the field of community psychology
at five universities in different Italian regions in the north,
center, and south. Each instructor invited the students in
their own course to participate in the research, filling out
an online questionnaire created and distributed through the
SurveyMonkey digital platform.
Data collection took place from March 24 to April 1, 2020,
i.e., during the week in which the number of cases of COVID-19
contagion reached its peak in Italy.
Participants consisted of 568 university students, 475 females
and 93 males, with an average age of 21.82 years (SD = 4.836).
For all participant characteristics, see Table 1.
Methods and Procedures
Students were asked to describe meaningful events and actions
related to their lockdown experience. In a sort of focalized
approach (Arcidiacono, 2016), we gave them an open stimulus,
but, at the same time, we asked them to delve into specific
dimensions: in this case, emotions, thoughts, actions, and events.
The text of each single student could be expressed in only a few
words, totaling no more than 10,000 characters.
When filling in the form on the SurveyMonkey platform,
students were asked to provide informed consent.
Those students were also offered the opportunity to receive
individual actions to express social support and the take care of
their own student community.
Data Analysis
The textual material written on the online platform was analyzed
by means of the Grounded Theory Methodology (GTM) (Corbin
and Strauss, 2008; Charmaz and Belgrave, 2018), using the
ATLAS.ti 8.0. Grounded theory, “at the most basic level (. . .)
remains an approach in which researchers use data to develop
theory from the bottom up” (Rasmussen et al., 2016, p. 23).
The process of data analysis starts after the first texts provided
were analyzed. The aim was for the entire research team to share
common meanings to be attributed to the written material. The
preliminary coding phase started with a bottom-up approach by
TABLE 1 | Characteristics of the participants.
Age M = 21.82
%
SD = 4.836
N (568)
Sex
Male 16.4 93
Female 83.6 475
Territorial area
North 28.0 159
Center 10.7 61
South 61.3 348
Sexual orientation
Heterosexual 91.0 517
Homosexual 3.0 17
Bisexual 5.3 30
Other sexual orientation 0.7 4
Housing condition
With one or both parents 85.0 483
Alone 2.8 16
With a partner 4.4 25
With one or more roommates 3.3 19
With other family members 4.4 25
University
University of Valle d’Aosta 11.4 65
Università Cattolica del Sacro CCuore Milan 17.3 98
University of Florence 9.9 56
University of Naples Federico II 51.6 293
University of Palermo 9.2 52
Other Italian universities 0.7 4
coding significant words and sentences. They were then shaped
into larger code groups and framed in wider categories.
Several online meetings took place, usually with the
participation of 10–17 researchers. A reflexivity-based iterative
process was undertaken among all team members. Notes,
theoretical memos, and preliminary codes for identifying
conceptual categories that shared common meanings were
discussed. A reflective procedure (Esposito et al., 2017)
was undertaken, in fact, researchers were asked to question
themselves to better interpret the findings as they emerged from
the texts. The heterogeneity of the research team—particularly in
terms of age, professional background, and prior experience with
GTM—was used as a resource to better interpret the content and
the meaning of the texts. This shared procedure produced several
subsequent coding frames, reaching a final shared categorical
frame by a consensual strategy. This activity was parallel to
the text coding activity that each unit brought to its material.
Finally, all codes framed in the shared categories were collected
in a common repository (Google Drive folder) and used to
start writing the final report. After this, categories, codes and
quotations were re-discussed again, and the team reached the
definition of the final missing aspects. Last but not least, students
of some universities were asked to share in the results.
A preliminary discussion on the collected texts was shared
with the students during the course of the study. The preliminary
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 March 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 571257Di Napoli et al. Italian Community Psychology in the COVID 19 Pandemic
FIGURE 1 | Categories and macrocategories.
results were also shared with groups of students not directly
involved in the research during seminars to which the researcher’s
team was invited.
A brief report will be provided to all students involved in
the research, highlighting the principal results as well as all
references to published articles through docent websites and/or
Facebook pages.
RESULTS
The results showed the presence of some sensitizing concepts
in the student’s storytelling (Blumer, 1969): in other words,
“thoughts and hunches” that researchers have as they get started
doing research.
The texts were then categorized into collective dimensions
such as connectedness, solidarity, social problems, and collective
mourning, but the coding also encompassed some specific
unexpected thoughts concerning national belonging that were
named “Italian-ness”.
The Collective dimensions macro-category included several
different categories (Figure 1):
Connectedness. A peculiar aspect—consistent with a situation
characterized by “being in the same boat,” or, better, “in the
same storm”—refers to sharing the same destiny: the wider
community perceives, especially at the peak of the contagion, a
close relationship, a “feeling of unity when facing misfortunes.”
The interdependence of fate, in the lesson learned from Lewin’s
contributions, is a powerful mechanism in building groups’
cohesion. Especially in small local communities or in regions
more heavily affected by the infection, such an aspect quickly
became the high road toward achieving a great—and, sometimes,
unexpected—level of social cohesion.
Other interviewees refer to aspects related to everyday life,
such as sharing useful information or exchanging recipes, because
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 March 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 571257Di Napoli et al. Italian Community Psychology in the COVID 19 Pandemic
cooking was one of the favorite pastimes during the lockdown,
with the sense both of expressing one’s creativity and of enriching
the new ritual of enjoying meals together, at the same table.
In addition, other shared suggestions concerned exercise and
workouts due to the discomfort caused by the forced inactivity
and the lack of movement perceived particularly in the first
days of confinement, and, above all, the most important topic
is the sharing of emotions: fear, worry, and uncertainty about
the future.
Participants thus wrote about connectedness. They wrote
about their own perceptions related to micro- and macrobelonging, and, consequently, about the cohesion experienced in
their proximal networks such as their neighborhood, partner, and
family: “the value of having meals all together, around the table,
at home.”
Singing and playing popular songs and hymns on balconies,
toasting one another from one side of the street to the other as
well as playing traditional bingo (tombola) socially together while
standing at windows overlooking the same courtyards suddenly
became the most relevant ways to express the value of “being
together.” Shared community emotional connectedness became
a new social issue.
At the community level, it is then interesting to note the
importance attributed to the social cohesion perceived in the local
community, “a great sense of community never perceived before
COVID,” even by the students who were used to spending most of
their time outside the home. Social networks were an important
way to feel “far, but, at the same time, close to significant others.”
Solidarity. A possible outcome of such feelings was the growth
of solidarity: “In my opinion, people may rediscover solidarity,
unselfishness, stop thinking about our own interests.”
Interviewees referred to community solidarity: even if at times
it did not involve all the residents, these feelings were widely
shared anyway. Solidarity was often defined as “rediscovered
humanity,” generally referring to the local community, and was
also detailed by specifying the more fragile inhabitants: the
elderly, people with disabilities or previous illnesses, and those
who felt “lost in an adverse event” or sometimes “worthless.”
Particular attention was paid to healthcare workers and
professionals: participants highlighted both the solidarity shown
by them toward the whole local community and the inhabitants’
appreciation for their work as “heroes” in pandemic times.
In addition, similar praise was expressed toward volunteers
engaged in providing meals or other basic necessities, or
individual protection devices, often lacking in the first phase
of lockdown.
Another aspect—emerging with particular emphasis in some
contexts—must be underscored: this refers to international
solidarity, demonstrated by physicians coming from abroad to
help the areas of Italy most seriously affected by the virus or
by providing medical devices and financial support. People—
and particularly some young people—generally think about other
countries as producers of goods or places worth visiting and not
as possible helpers.
In “normal” life participants seem to have considered
solidarity as a dimension coming from lucky (healthy,
medium-high income, and privileged) people toward the most
deprived individuals. During the lockdown they experienced
the meaning of loss and lack of resources, rediscovering
peer-to-peer solidarity.
Italian-ness. The social relationships we experience in daily life
also satisfy the need to feel like full members of a community that
is territorially recognized and confined in a specific physical and
mental space. This feeling of being Italian, and being recognized
by others as such, is what we called “Italian-ness.” It includes
those anthropological, cultural, and territorial characteristics that
connote being Italian. It is not only a question of characters
that are objectively unique to a nation, such as a symbol, a
geographical border, or a founding myth; a fundamental aspect
is, in fact, the common feeling which is that of being part of
something bigger and more important that is independent of
individual stances and, at the same time, includes them (Reicher
and Hopkin, 2001).
What emerges from the research is that the pandemic
connected people to the nation—and to some extent to the
populace—in a renewed feeling of Italian-ness. Among the
symbols, the “tricolor flag” displayed at windows and the “Italian
national anthem” sung in unison from the balconies of the
houses, or other songs grounded in national memory, all recurred
in the texts.
Even the posters displayed on the facades of the houses,
with the words “everything will be alright,” had a consoling
if not proactive effect. These were the actions through which
the population felt less alone or rather, less isolated (probably
also from the world) and “closer to all Italian citizens, as
never before.”
As one participant wrote: “People who get excited and
sing with you in a moment of collective pain can generate
reflected joy,” a collective action that outlines an action of
“national coping.”
In summary, the pandemic bonded people to the nation
in a renewed feeling of “Italian-ness,” highlighting how “in an
emergency there are no borders.”
Social Problems. From the social perspective, the description
of the problems seems to generate a certain polarity. In some
cases, an intrinsically social and collective vision of the problem
prevailed: “... the current situation of many Italian families left
without work and in poverty...;” “... how complicated the situation
is in general...;” “... in the elderly in the family, progressively more
and more alarming data have generated a strong fear for the future
of the country...;” “Isolation, necessary for physical health issues, in
the long run risks damaging people’s mental health.”
On the other hand, there were many expressions of
identification with others, where social concern focused on
the individual suffering of the other; therefore, the summative
character of the sufferings of the individual emerges as social. In
this regard, the texts collected presented a great deal of narrative
expressing attention to social problems: “Yesterday in my city’s
hospital, an elderly man committed suicide because he had been
infected and was afraid of having infected someone else. I’m afraid
these episodes will occur again;” “This made me think of how many
people are now alone and at greater risk.”
The variety and intensity of this meaning can also be
encapsulated entirely within this single statement: “Anxiety from
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 March 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 571257Di Napoli et al. Italian Community Psychology in the COVID 19 Pandemic
multiple points of view, for people who are in hospitals and
therefore disabled by the virus, for doctors, nurses, healthcare and
law enforcement workers, for my grandparents who are elderly, for
all those people who unfortunately do not have the means to be safe
and for our Italy which has been brought to its knees.”
Collective Mourning. The Social Mourning dimension seems
above all to emphasize the emergence of the community meaning
of death, as opposed to the contemporary tendency to consider
death as a private event and mourning as a personal elaboration.
What is represented in participants’ texts, therefore, is not only a
fact in itself, but above all the novelty, the surprise, the difference
compared to usual living conditions.
In this sense, some aspects appear to be significant. One of
these is the frequency with which participants speak about the
death of strangers. Fortunately, this is also probably related to
a low incidence of family mourning, but the recurrence of this
theme underlines the impact at a community level including for
the many people not directly involved: “. . .seeing all these people
die so much that they no longer have room in cemeteries...;” “...
the pain of all of us sitting on the sofa and hearing the number
of deaths every day took away our desire to speak, to smile,
people were dying...;” “The line of military vehicles leaving the
Bergamo hospital.”
An interesting feature of these statements is that, although
they are about strangers, the categories of meaning and the
discursive styles of the private dimension of mourning and
personal pain are mainly used, as if attuning to the families of
the deceased strangers. In the discourse, there is therefore a point
of contact between the collective entity of events and the affective
and family sphere for the attribution of meaning: “. . . he was in
a coffin ready to be cremated without family members having
the opportunity to say farewell to him and to be celebrated with
dignity...;” “The impossibility of saying goodbye to the deceased for
those who have lost someone.”
Another element that seems to refer to the community
dimension of mourning is the frequency with which the images
of the coffins and the line of military vehicles in Bergamo are
recalled in the various cities, even distant ones. This refers to a
visual representation of experiences conveyed by the mass media.
However, this aspect can also be taken for a better definition of
the experiences of mourning, because sometimes addressing loss
appears in the private dimension, linked to the direct experience
of the participants: “Death of a friend of my mom;” “One event
that surely struck me was the news of the death caused by the
coronavirus of a neighbor of my grandmother’s.” In other cases,
the absence of mourning in a social sense and of a community
ritual concerning “stranger” mourning, portrayed in the images
of military trucks in Bergamo, seems to be emphasized. In this
sense, it can be assumed that there is a subtle dissonance between
amplified public representations, such as those conveyed by
the media, and underestimated individual experiences or direct
experiences of mourning.
Finally, in some cases, the speed of contagion transmission
number was associated with the Social Mourning macrocategory. This occurrence may suggest the profound impression
aroused not only by the extent of the losses, but above all
by the occurrence, a rampant emergency, coming so fast as
to cause anxiety with respect to our practical possibility to
combat it.
Collective values. The Collective values macro-category
includes different categories that refer to behaviors, attitudes,
or values related to respect for other people, the rules of living
in a community, respect for the rules and responsibility as well
as Values of Freedom and civic-mindedness. Civic sense, for
example, collects the codes referring to “staying at home” as a
form of respect for the rules such as adherence to restrictions
required by institutions: “An action that emerges as crucial in
this period I believe is respect for the rules and decrees issued.
Respecting rules and decrees, being selfless while staying at home.”
Participants, therefore, stated opinions concerning a sense of
justice. They referred to the failure of some people to comply
with the rules, an injustice toward those who, conversely, did not
transgress them. The lack of collective values is connected to this
aspect of justice, and it is expressed as individualism, selfishness,
and a lack of responsibility.
This refers to an attitude of focusing on oneself and one’s needs
while ignoring those of others: “Different people can’t help putting
their personal needs before collective needs,” which is reflected in
behaviors that denote a lack of respect for the community and
negligence in people’s behavior.
Some examples of these behaviors are escaping lockdown by
train to return home, moving from the so-called “red zones” of
Italy, which were considered highly contagious, and irresponsible
shopping in supermarket to get as many items as possible. “The
selfishness of these people makes me understand that there is no
emotional bond that holds. Faced with the fear of dying these people
would also sell their soul to the devil; egoism has never brought
benefits to society and to the individual lives of people. I cannot
understand how all this can happen without thinking in the least
about who is on the other side.”
An important value on which the interviewees focused
was freedom. During this period of lockdown, this assumed
the connotation of “rediscovered value.” Freedom became a
fundamental dimension in daily life, very often taken for granted;
it took on great importance when it was taken away from us.
Last, particular attention was paid to the dimension of the
environment. Many participants wondered about the effect that
the pandemic would have on nature, often speaking of “the world
that is being purified” and “planet earth that is reborn,” coming to
the conclusion that “the negative experience for human beings is
becoming positive for nature.”
Prosocial Orientation
The prosocial orientation macro-category contains two different
categories: trust and hope. As far as trust is concerned, the
interviewees declared that this state of emergency had increased
their confidence and has made them conscious of the importance
of trusting their fellow citizens, humanity, and, above all, the
public institutions: “Increasing trust in others is a fundamental
premise for moving forward and overcoming the crisis situation.”
Trust in fellow citizens is basically considered as very
important for empowering everybody to adopt precautionary
behaviors to protect themselves and other people: “We really need
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 March 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 571257Di Napoli et al. Italian Community Psychology in the COVID 19 Pandemic
this type of trust which is trust in others. To believe that people
really realize what we are currently experiencing.”
Moreover, the students refer to an increased confidence in
public institutions, above all in the Prime Minister, thanks to the
closeness and understanding that the institutions showed toward
the citizens: “Then, leaving aside any political opinion, I’ve been
impressed—positively this time—by the governmental promptness
in sending out a message of strength, safety, and trust.”
Great confidence and recognition were expressed for the
Italian lockdown model since it displayed an emphasis on care:
“I felt relieved and a little bit reassured because I had the feeling
that the state was putting in place actions and that we as a people
were not alone at the mercy of the disease.”
Trust in the authorities also increased gratitude for the
presence of checks on compliance with the lockdown: “Something
positive that I have noticed is the high number of checks that the
police are carrying out. In my neighborhood I see police cars passing
continuously and stopping passers-by and cars.”
However, there is a portion of the students who show distrust
toward fellow citizens and authorities regarding the management
of the emergency. The distrust is mainly toward careless attitudes
adopted by other inhabitants and institutions: “Ignoring the rules
imposed by the authorities regarding the coronavirus emergency, it
makes me lose esteem and trust in our society.”
For some of the interviewees, a symbol of hope is represented
by the drawings that Italian children made, recognized as symbols
of positivity toward the future; children’s drawings were also
represented as a trigger for serenity, relieving the worries and
sadness of the lockdown period.
The saying “#andràtuttobene” (#everything will be alright)
became a symbol of an individual and collective hope of
recovering and returning to normality.
The hope category, as an emotional future-directed
network, describes what the subjects desired right after the
emergency phase.
Hope, however, carries different attributes for the
interviewees. Some of the interviewees hope for a revolution
compared with what existed before the onset of COVID-19, that
is, the possibility of adopting new and different ways of living in
the future. Thus, hope for the revolution means importing new
ways of establishing interpersonal relationships, taking care of
the most vulnerable, having greater care for the environment:
“To rebuild a new a world. More creative. More responsible. More
aware. More true. More united. I do not want normality anymore.
I want a masterpiece;” “. . . I wish that this moment would bring a
real revolution. Inside and outside ourselves. I want to learn the
lesson of this hard moment. I do not want to ever lose any bit of
what was taught.”
For some youth, hope will return when they can resume living
as in prior everyday life, before the COVID-19 emergency: “I
hope this moment will pass soon. Panta rei that is “everything
flows” as an important ancient Greek philosopher used to
say, so I wish that the stress that our country is suffering
will weaken soon;” “Hope that everything will end soon
is strong.”
Then some of the interviewees refer to the lack of hope as
the inability to imagine themselves in the future. Inability to
foresee when the emergency will end makes the interviewees
afraid and discouraged.
DISCUSSION
The coffins left behind in the Bergamo morgue continuously
broadcast by media for several days was the image also reported
by the frequent dreams (Iorio et al., 2020) that best expressed the
dimension of collective mourning; conversely, people talking to
each other from balconies was the voice of connectedness. Here
visual representations give us the symbolic meaning shared by
our respondents. We can, therefore, consider this two-fold image
as a core category encompassing shared meaning attributed to
this pandemic at the community level. The lines of coffins and
people singing and toasting from balconies, respectively express
this emotional sharing of collective mourning and the need to
express shared feelings of connectedness. In this case, we assumed
as a core category not a sentence or a word but two visual images
reported by the texts, and it is worth mentioning how visual
communication expresses feelings and thoughts (Arcidiacono
et al., 2016). At the beginning of the lockdown, this aspiration
to share and stay connected was the first spontaneous reaction
to the media reports of deaths and infections. Signs of reciprocal
solidarity were also expressed and described.
According to Walker (2020), “Psychological research
suggests that being in an emergency can create a common
identity amongst those affected. Emergencies appear to at least
temporarily dissolve social division as the development of this
identity facilitates a degree of cooperative altruism even when
amongst strangers in life-threatening situations” (p. 4).
Confirming what was reported in the introduction, in the
words of the participants, the renewed desire for bonding and
community was evident in response to the situation of collective
trauma (Ntontis and Rocha, 2020). In fact, unity strengthens the
belief in a greater ability to cope with the emergency. It is not
trivial to point out that this rediscovered unity also occurred
through the recovery of some traditions (social games, cooking,
etc.), which represent an anchor to something known, something
that does not change (even down through generations) in a time
when lives are turned upside down. It is interesting that at a
time when the need for freedom and escape is curtailed, tradition
retains its consoling meaning for the community, which is to
cling onto certainties while adapting them to new needs, even
when these are completely unusual and unpredictable.
We have also found this renewed interest in bonds in what
we could define as behavioral solidarity toward humanity. In
particular, it places the most isolated social categories (such as the
elderly, the homeless, etc.) or professional categories less valued
by government policies (i.e., doctors, nurses, and the whole health
system) at the center of attention and collective sensitivity.
We also found that the epidemic led individual citizens to
have a shared emotional experience and to develop a social
identity that we have called Italian-ness. In fact, in line with
the Intergroup Emotions Theory (Smith and Mackie, 2015),
this dramatic event, even if it involved the Italian regions to
a different degree, triggered group-based emotions in Italians.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 March 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 571257Di Napoli et al. Italian Community Psychology in the COVID 19 Pandemic
These common emotions were independent of the individual
level and were linked by a sense of belonging to a common
identity. As studies of people exposed to emergencies suggest
(Drury et al., 2016, 2019), sharing the crisis situation fostered
a sense of belonging among individuals, which was managed to
overcome the profound differences that characterize the different
regions of the national territory.
This identity was also strengthened by the fact that Italy
was at that time the only European country to be severely
affected by the epidemic. In fact, during the period in which
the data were collected, there was an image, fueled by fear
and by social media, of Italians as spreaders of the virus. As
postulated again by the Intergroup Emotions Theory (Smith
and Mackie, 2015), this discriminatory experience favored social
identity thanks to opposition to an outgroup represented by other
European countries.
In addition, as Dovidio et al. (2020) argue, the delocalization
of the virus that has affected the entire globe and configured itself
as a global threat has exported the threat out of the ingroup of
belonging, lowering the level of intra-group conflict. This could
explain the generalized and newly found trust in the “Other,”
which at a higher level of categorization creates a common
ingroup identity to which one belongs (Gaertner et al., 2016).
In this way, respondents “recognize people are the solution,
not the problem” (Jetten et al., 2020, ivi, p. 11). In fact, they
become the problem when they do not respect the civic norms
that protect the global community, of which everyone—during
the pandemic—feels they can be part. The Other, then, can also
be a source of mirroring and not just identification (Novara
et al., 2019), awakening an empathic capacity that we find in the
feeling of collective mourning, in the concern for the economic
difficulties of some families, for the risk that workers in the field
run, for the community. All these things—as some say—will need
to be taken better care of in the future, including reawakening
environmental responsibility.
Moreover, in line with literature (Rönnerstrand, 2016; Sibley
et al., 2020), there is an increased sense of trust in political
institutions in which the interviewees recognize an attitude of
care and attention, as well as toward other citizens. Therefore,
trust for interviewees is a necessary condition for overcoming the
crisis situation.
Finally, it is interesting to note the feeling of hope (Solnit,
2020) in the results regarding not only the prospective image
of how we will live together after COVID-19 but also the
retrospective image of how we will live in the future based on
what has been in the past: conscious collective learning.
Indeed, hope, despite being little explored in its implications
in a pandemic situation, is a very important issue, moreover
considering it as a socially constructed emotion connected to the
quality of life (Scioli, 2007).
This was probably also the benefit of the storytelling method
that we used in the research: It allowed the interviewees not
only to report their experiences but to narrate them in the
psychological sense, accessing an emotional and meaningful
elaboration of their experiences, and we know how much
this can promote preventive and caring behavior during
mass emergencies.
Finally, this study confirms that young people are attentive
and sensitive to social issues, as elsewhere described (Alfieri et al.,
2019) and have developed a concern for community.
Limits
This research is not without limits. This study collected
experiences of students, and in the classes we included, there was
a greater number of females. The number of participants also
differs among various universities, but it is quite balanced among
the northern, southern, and central regions of Italy. Furthermore,
the participants are university students studying in humanities
departments; therefore, the sample does not represent all Italian
university students and young Italians, more broadly.
In a future study, it would be interesting to develop situated
differences among young Italians of different social contexts and
to compare the results with youth from other countries facing the
pandemic with different strategies.
CONCLUSION
This study reveals the initial emotions, thoughts, and actions
undertaken at a collective level by students of the North,
South, and Center of Italy. Its value is to grasp the primary
reaction to the lockdown emergency. It highlights how around
Italy, people undertook actions aimed at maintaining continuity
among people and overcoming the forced closure of society.
For us, as community psychologists, this need for connectedness
expresses how community interactions are the pillar of social life.
In this vein, Italian-ness may be understood as a form of
shared national identity that makes possible a common identity.
Furthermore, the many references to the whole world and
environmental needs demonstrate a wider social identification
with our planet and all human beings.
Referring to the Elaborated Social Identity Model (ESIM)
of crowd behavior developed by Cocking et al. (2009), Carl
Walker suggests that it is a “common identity that can result
in people helping and supporting each other, even if they are
complete strangers. Coronavirus functions in a similar way,
positioning groups of people as being under attack from a
common and indiscriminate enemy” (2020 p, 4). Therefore, it is
not surprising that connectedness actions were among the first
collective reactions for our students.
Similarly, solidarity occupied a significant place in collective
descriptions of our respondents: “Evidence from a range of
different disasters in different countries (Drury et al., 2019)
confirms the link between a sense of shared fate and shared
social identity, and also between emergent social identity and
solidarity” (p. 104).
Narratives coming from the data collected show communities
at first astonished and then frightened by the persistence of the
contagion. Suddenly, disease and death pervaded everyday life.
The psychosocial and collective response, in order to restore
an acceptable threshold of well-being—according to Nelson and
Prilleltensky (2010) and Prilleltensky (2008)—was to make sense
of the whole experience and to undertake all the behaviors
needed to care for mental and social health. In the face of social
distancing, affecting the opportunities for closer and physical
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 March 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 571257Di Napoli et al. Italian Community Psychology in the COVID 19 Pandemic
relationships, alternative measures were imagined: virtual
connectedness, sense of cohesion expressed by shared rituals
(playing, singing, toasting, etc.), organization of community and
neighborhood support, first of all, addressed toward the most
fragile citizens, such as—for opposite reasons—young people
who wished to meet peers and elderly people, heartbroken by
the loneliness and by the perceived risk of infection. Creativity
advanced in order to provide unusual and effective actions
for increasing mutual caregiving, individual and community
health and well-being, and sense of community (Chavis and
Wandersman, 1990; Talò et al., 2014) in adverse events.
The complexity and depth of these data show the potentiality
of storytelling as a tool that offered the students the opportunity
to re-think and reprocess traumatic events, a space to rework
them. It has proved to be a tool that not only has value in itself but
also for the effects it had. Storytelling helped the young people
build a meaning into their experiences, to elaborate fears but
also to give voice and creative expression to those experiences.
Storytelling empowered young people and was a powerful way to
improve their overall wellbeing.
From a community psychology perspective, in line with
the COVID-19 Statement of EFPA ECPA, 2020, we hope
that some collective feelings described by our young Italian
respondents during the pandemic will build “new ways of
understanding the networks of communities we are part of.”
Building trust and solidarity is a long-term process, involving
public and private sectors (Capone et al., 2020; Procentese et al.,
2020). Communities in many countries are amazingly active in
strengthening their feeling of belonging and building new forms
of community. Helping to preserve the treasure of engaged,
creative, and home-grown ideas and “popup”-solutions will be
important if we want to maintain the sense of community and
co-creation, which is emerging in our societies.
Therefore, it is to be hoped that these preliminary
considerations on the COVID-19 lockdown experience will
reach a larger audience and therefore become a lever for social
change as the special issue proposed by Castelnuovo et al. (2020)
intends to do.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The studies involving human participants were reviewed
and approved by University Federico II, Department of
Humanities, Ethics Board for Research in Psychology. The
patients/participants provided their written informed consent to
participate in this study.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.




NEW PAPER




COVID-19 Emergency in the Hospital: How the Clinical Psychology Unit
Is Responding
Eugenia Cao di San Marco
Santi Paolo and Carlo Hospital, Milan, Italy
Julia Menichetti
University of Oslo
Elena Vegni
Santi Paolo and Carlo Hospital, Milan, Italy, and University of Milan
The present commentary describes the main care services implemented by the clinical psychology unit
of an Italian hospital to cope with the COVID-19 emergency outbreak. The unit’s main goal has been to
support and protect health care professionals, relatives of hospitalized patients, and patients themselves
from further psychological distress. Details and insights are shared.
Keywords: COVID-19, hospital, psychological care services
Nowadays Italy is the third most affected country in the world
from coronavirus, after the United States and Spain (Dong, Du, &
Gardner, 2020). According to U.S.-based Johns Hopkins University, which is tracking the disease globally, at the current date
(April 20, 2020, exactly 2 months after the outbreak), 108,237
people in Italy have been treated either at the hospital or at home
for the COVID-19 virus, and more than 24,000 people have died
(Dong et al., 2020). These numbers are only partially reliable,
because people who died at home or in private care facilities are
not included; therefore the number of COVID-19 victims may be
even higher. Northern Italy has been hit the most: One third of all
confirmed coronavirus cases are located in the region of Lombardy, where the COVID-19 mortality has been significantly
above everywhere else so far (Department of Civil Protection,
2020). Lombardy health care capacity is under pressure, and
hospital intensive care units are saturated, potentially explaining
the impressive mortality rates in the area (Favero, 2020).
Because of this situation, the Italian population is under strain,
especially those living in Lombardy and dealing with the emergency from the front line: health care professionals, COVID-19
patients, and their families. As psychologists, we are observing a
wide range of (ongoing or latent) psychological responses from
these groups of individuals: from hypervigilance to emotional
avoidance and moral distress, which could develop in an acute
stress disorder or a posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), because
the extreme circumstances may not allow an emotion process of
the ongoing traumatic experience (Horesh & Brown, 2020).
The present commentary aimed to describe how the clinical
psychology unit of one of the biggest public hospitals in the
regional capital of Lombardy (Milan) has been working to support
the groups most involved in this emergency: the health care
professionals, the relatives of the COVID-19 patients, and the
patients themselves. The psychological care services have been
constructed and activated with an emergency logic, which aims to
react to the immediate ongoing clinical needs but also to anticipate
the next ones. Moreover, to offer psychological support coherent
with ongoing clinical priorities and needs, such emergency-related
psychological services have been coordinated with the hospital
medical practice as much as possible; for example, by ensuring
direct phone lines with operators of the COVID-19 units. The
clinical psychology unit’s main goal (at the moment) is to cure and
prevent psychological distress, in particular acute stress disorder
and PTSD, of health care professionals, families of COVID-19
patients, and patients.
For health care professionals, two types of psychological support were organized: the decompression room and the small-group
sessions. The decompression room is a physical and mental space
that has been created to offer them a safe place where they can
“decompress” (i.e., reflect, relax, get in touch with emotions and
express them) during and after work: It has music and cozy
armchairs, and there is a psychologist ready to listen. The room
allows health care professionals to think about what is happening
to them and how the situation makes them feel. This is important
especially in the beginning of an emergency, when everybody is in
a constant rush, physically activated by adrenaline, focusing on
Editor’s Note. This commentary received rapid review due to the timesensitive nature of the content. It was reviewed by the Journal Editor.—
KKT
This article was published Online First June 1, 2020.
X Eugenia Cao di San Marco, Unit of Clinical Psychology, Santi Paolo
and Carlo Hospital, Milan, Italy; X Julia Menichetti, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oslo; X Elena Vegni, Unit of Clinical Psychology, Santi Paolo and Carlo Hospital, and Clinical Psychology, Department
of Health Sciences, University of Milan.
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Eugenia
Cao di San Marco, Unit of Clinical Psychology, Santi Paolo and Carlo
Hospital, Via Antonio di Rudinì, 8 –20142 Milan, Italy. E-mail:
e.caodisanmarco@gmail.com
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Psychological Trauma:
Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy
© 2020 American Psychological Association 2020, Vol. 12, No. S1, S43–S44
ISSN: 1942-9681 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/tra0000684
S43only what to do next (Selye, 1950). Nevertheless, the room is also
helpful in the second phase of the emergency, when the adrenaline
fades away, leaving depression and fatigue and other negative
feelings to be addressed. The small-group sessions work in a
complementary way: The psychologist goes to the doctors’ and
nurses’ room to debrief and defuse about what is happening. All
together they share their recent clinical experiences, enhancing
their mutual help resources. In both the decompression room and
the small groups, moral distress (Lamiani, Borghi, & Argentero,
2017) is one of the key themes addressed: In emergencies, it is
normal to think that what one is doing is not enough. The clinical
psychology unit aims to make it a shared experience and not
something that professionals have to deal with alone.
The second area of intervention is the one concerning the
relatives of the hospitalized COVID-19 patients, who are not able
to be near to their loved ones due to social distancing and quarantine, even in the extreme, but not so rare, case of death. Death is
a part of the process of caring, and the aim of the hospital is not
only to offer the cure. So we decided to have an active role in
taking care of death and dying. Among other calls to support
families, psychologists have been implementing a phone call to the
relatives’ next of kin approximately 48 hr after the death of their
dear one. This phone call has different meanings: First, it aims to
help the mourning process and enhances the family’s emotional
resources. It also helps the family in finding a creative way to say
goodbye to the dead nowadays, when funerals are not an option.
Moreover, it lets the family know that their loved one was not
alone in the process of death, because the hospital staff was with
them as a part of the hospital institutional mandate. Furthermore,
it lets the family itself know that they are not alone: Psychological
care is available to help them if they need it. Eventually, the phone
call also aims to relieve the medical staff: Doctors feel less lonely
in the relationship with the patient’s family if they know that a
psychologist is also caring about them.
Last but not least, the clinical psychology unit has been taking
care of COVID-19 hospitalized patients themselves. This was not
possible straight after the emergency breakout because there was
so much to do on a practical level by nurses and doctors that there
was no space to even think to the psychological needs aside of the
medical ones. Nonetheless, after a couple of weeks in which
the medical emergency became more stable, the psychologists
were able to start attending those patients too, either because the
patients themselves started to ask for a psychological intervention
or because the health care staff was able to detect a psychological
needs from them. These COVID-19 patients have been offered
private sessions with the psychologists about their ongoing situation to better understand and process their feelings and emotions.
Many patients suffer from anxiety and depression, which compromise their physical wellness even more. A lot of them suffer from
their condition of isolation that the COVID-19 requires. Other
patients are dealing with the mourning process of someone recently died from the same conditions they are fighting. Last, the
patients who recover and go home may experience survival guilt
and other negative feelings from the shock of their traumatic
disease experience.
These are some of the key actions that the clinical psychology
unit has currently prioritized and mobilized to take care of the
emergency-related hospital needs and to the COVID-19-related
distress among those in greatest need. Such actions are revealing
critical areas that clinical psychology can tackle to contribute to
mental health promotion and response. We expect that such areas
and related needs may change and will require an ongoing process
of adaptation and adjustment of psychological action to care for
those who are most in need.




NEW PAPER


EDITORIAL
School Psychology Reflections on COVID-19, Antiracism, and Gender and
Racial Disparities in Publishing
Robin S. Codding
Northeastern University
Melissa Collier-Meek
University of Massachusetts Boston
Shane Jimerson
University of California, Santa Barbara
David A. Klingbeil
University of Wisconsin–Madison
Matthew J. Mayer
Rutgers University
Faith Miller
University of Minnesota
School Psychology is an outlet for research on children, youth, educators, and families that has scientific,
practice, and policy implications. The novel coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has significantly
disrupted K-12 schooling as well as university training, impacting educational attainment and highlighting longstanding inequality. Furthermore, the killing of Breonna Taylor and George Floyd has precipitated worldwide protests against antiblack racism, white supremacy, and police brutality. In this
editorial, we highlight the potential impacts to our field, including prioritizing research related to
educational equity, identifying new research questions related to technology, and utilizing new research
methods. We also consider the impact of gender and racial disparities in publications during this time.
Finally, given these events, we discuss how best our editorial team can serve the field.
Impact and Implications
The editorial team reflects on the novel coronavirus pandemic, antiracism, as well as gender and
racial disparities in publishing. Considerations for the field of school psychology are discussed and
thoughts on how the editorial team can best serve the journal and its readers are contemplated.
Keywords: covid-19, antiracism, publishing disparities
School Psychology has always prided itself on enhancing the
science, practice, and policy of immediately pertinent issues for
children, youth, and the adults who support them. We aim to offer
scholars and practitioners access to cutting-edge knowledge that is
grounded in practical applications and addresses current issues in
the United States and around the world. The impact of the global
health crisis brought on by the novel coronavirus pandemic
(COVID-19) on the field of school psychology has been swift. We
have contemplated, with our national organizations (National Association of School Psychologists, American Psychological Association) how to effectively complete graduate training, ethically
incorporate telehealth, advise educational systems and administrators, and bolster multitiered prevention systems for effective, feasible, and efficient service delivery as well as advocate for children’s physical and mental health, well-being, and education.
Sudden school closures and planning for U.S. school reentry at the
university and K-12 levels was all consuming, thwarted by rapidly
changing guidelines and recommendations in addition to a lack of
knowledge regarding the full impact of COVID-19 on our educational, family, and health care systems.
Furthermore, as we write this editorial, we find ourselves in the
midst of one of the most significant calls for social justice in modern
X Robin S. Codding, Department of Applied Psychology, Bouve College of
Health Sciences, Northeastern University; Melissa Collier-Meek, Department of
Counseling and School Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston; Shane
Jimerson, Department of Counseling, Clinical, and School Psychology, University
of California, Santa Barbara; David A. Klingbeil, Department of Educational
Psychology, University of Wisconsin–Madison; Matthew J. Mayer, Department of
Educational Psychology, Rutgers University; Faith Miller, Department of Educational Psychology, University of Minnesota.
Author order is alphabetical after Robin S. Codding.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Robin S.
Codding, Department of Applied Psychology, Bouve College of Health
Sciences, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Avenue, 404 International Village, Boston, MA 02115. E-mail: r.codding@northeastern.edu
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.
School Psychology
© 2020 American Psychological Association 2020, Vol. 35, No. 4, 227–232
ISSN: 2578-4218 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/spq0000399
227history, precipitated by the killing of Breonna Taylor and George
Floyd. These deaths, representing more instances of a continuing
pattern of horrific acts of racial injustice, triggered protests in all 50
states and countries across the world against antiblack racism, white
supremacy, and police brutality. These events have significant impacts on matters of great importance to us, as a society and as a field.
The convergence of these mid- and longer-term challenges, and the
varied and interwoven impacts they will have on multiple facets of
life, require a reassessment of priorities, strategies, and actions within
school psychology. Accordingly, the editorial team is considering
how we can best serve the field.
The impact on children and the infrastructure of K-12 schooling in
the United States and around the world as a result of COVID-19 is
speculative but forecasts suggest that we will need to consider shifting
the focus of the work that we do. Projections indicate that, should U.S.
schools reopen in the fall, K-8 students could simply experience loss
of learning in reading and mathematics that outpaces general summer
loss, or students could experience substantial learning loss, retaining
only 50% of the previous year’s learning gains in mathematics and
70% of learning gains in reading (Huffman, 2020; Kuhfeld &
Tarasawa, 2020). Availability of educational content during school
closures varied across the nation, depending on state and local interpretations of federal recommendations and impacted by nationwide
infrastructure problems with access to high-speed Internet (Perrin,
2019). Exposure to asynchronous or synchronous and other learning
opportunities was affected by school resources such as availability of
digital devices and the potential for dissemination of paper-based
learning materials (Herold, 2020). The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted and intensified longstanding inequities and opportunity gaps within the public education system, illustrating racial
disparities, disparities between wealthy and poor school districts, and
disparities between rural, urban, and suburban districts (e.g., Groeger,
Waldman, & Eads, 2018; Herold, 2020; Litvinov, 2020). Students
who are English learners or benefiting from special education services
have experienced adjustments in their service delivery that are probably inadequate and unlikely to reflect their educational goals, falling
short of adequately meeting these students’ needs. Many students will
experience trauma, grief, and/or loss directly because loved ones were
impacted by COVID-19 or indirectly from economic fallouts, food
shortages, domestic violence, and child abuse (Bauer, 2020; Huffman,
2020; Minke, 2020).
Such issues are further exacerbated by the current sociocultural
climate following the killing of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, and so
many others before them. These events impact our collective sense of
safety, belonging, and well-being but are particularly harmful for
members of Black communities (Bor, Venkataramani, Williams, &
Tsai, 2018). Even exposure to viral videos depicting such events has
deleterious consequences for persons of color (Tynes, Willis, Stewart,
& Hamilton, 2019). We must look ahead, cognizant of the impacts of
racial trauma in the work that we do. Children will return to school
with existing or emerging anxiety, depression, fear, and discomfort.
Educators, as well as families of the children the school systems serve,
will need support, outreach, and professional development on traumainformed practices (Minke, 2020).
How will we as a field address these realities during the pandemic
and how will we address the long-term impacts? Perhaps we as a field
will look deeper at research around educational equity, prioritize work
that is culturally informed, and include participants from underrepresented racial and ethnic groups. In doing so, we can consider how
critical culturally responsive practices can be more widely implemented and identify novel ways to address longstanding systematic
barriers within public education. We may ask new types of research
questions related to (a) the benefits and barriers of educational technology; (b) equitable access to effective core instruction; (c) promotion of wellness and mental health; and (d) integration of traumainformed practices. Perhaps we will embrace opportunities to engage
with the international community to conduct research that that is
cross-national in the aftermath of this global experience. Perhaps we
will build new partnerships to bridge the research to practice and
access to implement gaps. To do so, we may consider learning about
or incorporating new methodological approaches within our research
agendas (Maki, Farmer, & Sullivan, 2020).
Our editorial team is also thinking about the future of science
and publishing. Speculation from experts implies publication records will reveal, within the next few years, that parents in academia, relative to nonparents, will have been disadvantaged during
the pandemic, a consequence of schooling from home and daycare
closures (Minello, 2020). Preliminary data, within the science and
economic fields, have been distributed by numerous news outlets
describing women’s low rates of journal submissions during the
pandemic. These low submission rates were likely impacted by the
reality that women often carry a larger burden of the academic
housekeeping within higher education institutions, domestic responsibilities, elder care, and child care. Some of these data
suggest that these low submission rates are disproportionally observed within early-career faculty (Flaherty, 2020; Viglione, 2020;
Vincent-Lamarre, Sugimoto, & Larivière, 2020).
Analysis of COVID-19 –related research and proposals for emergency grant funding likewise illustrates gender and race disparities,
particularly among early-career scholars (Vincent-Lamarre et al.,
2020). These data suggest that COVID-19 has exacerbated alreadyexisting discrepancies in grant dollars awarded to women and researchers of color (e.g., Ginther et al., 2011; Shen, 2013). Women
scientists of color are predicted to be impacted even more than White
women scholars (500 Women Scientists, 2020). It is well documented
that the pandemic has had a disproportionate impact on the AfricanAmerican and Latinx communities as a result of structural racism
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020; Garg et al., 2020;
500 Women Scientists, 2020). We should, as a field, recognize the
disproportionate impact on productivity that this pandemic is likely to
bring on parents, women faculty, and faculty of color when we
consider scholarship recognition. We should purposely cite women
scholars and scholars of color. Our editorial team is dedicated to
identifying and incorporating practical strategies and thoughtful action to facilitate change in the short and longer term. We stand with
our colleagues in support of the School Psychology Unified Antiracism Statement and Call to Action (see Appendix, reprinted with the
permission of the authors; Table A1).
The editorial team at School Psychology is dedicated to continuing
peer review operations during this unprecedented period. However,
considering COVID-19’s impact on many people’s daily activities,
we are mindful that this is a difficult time for many. Accordingly, we
have extended the review timeline from 21 days (3 weeks) to 35 days
(5 weeks). If an invitation is reaching you at a time when you are
unable to commit, we understand, and please let us know. We are also
happy to offer more extended time options if you would like to
complete the review. We have asked senior scholars to consider
taking on more article reviews and serving in guest editor roles to
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.
228 CODDING ET AL.alleviate some of the work demands on early-career scholars who may
be more likely to be parenting and schooling their children from
home. We offer our sincerest appreciation to those senior scholars
who already have served the journal in this capacity. We will reach
farther and more often into our ad hoc reviewer board. If you are able
to engage more frequently in the peer-review process, please let us
know. We are sensitive to the need for extended time that many
authors may require to permit adequate attention to revisions before
resubmission, and we are happy to work with authors on deadlines.
One striking aspect about this crisis is the exacerbation of longstanding inequities in our society that are also embedded in our K-12
educational and university systems. The stakes are high. With this
recognition comes great opportunity to shape and alter the future of
the field and impact systems that we work for and within. Creativity
and community are words that also will describe this time as solutions
are generated for the new challenges that we will all face. Together we
can cultivate ideas that will address systemic barriers and inequalities.
We invite you to contact us with your thoughts on how the journal can
address these challenges. Our editorial team looks forward to supporting your work, reading your papers, and listening to your ideas.
References
500 Women Scientists. (2020, May 7). Scientist mothers face extra challenges in the face of COVID-19. Scientific American. Retrieved from
https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/voices/scientist-mothers-faceextra-challengesin-the-face-of-covid-19/
Bauer, L. (2020). The COVID-19 crisis has already left too many children
hungry in America. Retrieved from https://www.brookings.edu/blog/upfront/2020/05/06/the-covid-19-crisis-has-already-left-too-manychildren-hungry-in-america/
Bor, J., Venkataramani, A. S., Williams, D. R., & Tsai, A. C. (2018). Police
killings and their spillover effects on the mental health of black Americans: A population-based, quasi-experimental study. Lancet, 392, 302–
310. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31130-9
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). COVID-19 in racial
and ethnic minority groups. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/
coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/racial-ethnic-minorities
.html
Flaherty, C. (2020). No room of one’s own. Inside of higher ed. Retrieved
from https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2020/04/21/early-journalsubmission-data-suggest-covid-19-tanking-womens-researchproductivity
Garg, S., Kim, L., Whitaker, M., O’Halloran, A., Cummings, C., Holstein,
R., . . . Fry, A. (2020). Hospitalization rates and characteristics of
patients hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed coronavirus disease
2019—COVID-NET, 14 states, March 1–30, 2020. Morbidity Mortality
Weekly Report, 69, 458 – 464. http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr
.mm6915e3
Ginther, D. K., Schaffer, W. T., Schnell, J., Masimore, B., Liu, F., Haak,
L. L., & Kington, R. (2011). Race, ethnicity, and NIH research awards.
Science, 333, 1015–1019. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1196783
Groeger, L. V., Waldman, A., & Eads, D. (2018, October 16). Miseducation: Is there racial inequality at your school? PropPublica. Retreived
from https://projects.propublica.org/miseducation/
Herold, B. (2020, March 27). The scramble to move America’s schools
online. Education Week. Retrieved from https://www.edweek.org/ew/
articles/2020/03/26/the-scramble-to-move-americas-schools-online.html
Huffman, K. (2020, March 27). Homeschooling during the coronavirus
will set back a generation of children.Washington Post. Retrieved from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/coronavirus-homeschoolingwill-hurt-students-badly/2020/03/27/f639882a-6f62-11ea-b148-e4ce3fb
d85b5_story.html
Kuhfeld, M., & Tarasawa, B. (2020). The COVID-19 slide: What summer
learning loss can tell us about the potential impact of school closures on
student academic achievement. Portland, OR: NWEA.
Litvinov, A. (2020, May 4). Coronovirus brings ‘homework gap’ to the
forefront. NEAToday. Retrieved from http://neatoday.org/2020/05/04/
coronavirus-brings-homework-gap-to-the-forefront/
Maki, K. E., Farmer, R., & Sullivan, A. (2020). Coping with COVID-19 as
an early career scholar—Part 2: What about my research? (and an appeal
to not so early career scholars). Early Career Forum: Society for the
Study of School Psychology. Retrieved from https://www.sssp-research.
org/earlycareerforum-covid2/.
Minello, A. (2020). The pandemic and the female academic. Nature.
Retrieved from https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-01135-9
Minke, K. (2020). The pandemic is causing widespread emotional trauma.
Schools must be ready to help. Education Week. Retrieved from https://
www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2020/05/07/the-pandemic-is-causing-wide
spread-emotional-trauma.html
Perrin, A. (2019, May 31). Digital gap between rural and nonrural
America persists. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. Retrieved
from https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/05/31/digital-gapbetween-rural-and-nonrural-america-persists/
Shen, H. (2013). Mind the gender gap: Despite improvements, female
scientists continue to face discrimination, unequal pay, and funding
disparities. Nature, 495, 22–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/495022a
Tynes, B. M., Willis, H. A., Stewart, A. M., & Hamilton, M. W. (2019).
Race-related traumatic events online and mental health among adolescents of color. Journal of Adolescent Health, 65, 371–377. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2019.03.006
Viglione, G. (2020). Are women publishing less during the pandemic?
Here’s what the data say. Nature, 581, 365–366. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1038/d41586-020-01294-9
Vincent-Lamarre, P., Sugimoto, C. R., & Larivière, V. (2020). The decline
of women’s research production during the coronavirus pandemic. Nature Index. Retrieved from https://www.natureindex.com/news-blog/
decline-women-scientist-research-publishing-production-coronaviruspandemic
(Appendix follows)
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.
SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY REFLECTIONS 229Appendix
School Psychology Unified Antiracism Statement and Call to Action
Dear School Psychology Community,
“Psychologists aspire to recognize and understand historical
and contemporary experiences with power, privilege, and oppression. As such, they seek to address institutional barriers and
related inequities, disproportionalities, disparities of law enforcement, and administration of criminal justice, educational, mental
health, and other systems as they seek to promote justice, human
rights, and access to quality and equitable mental and behavioral
health services” (American Psychological Association [APA]
multicultural guidelines).
We recognize, are outraged by, and mourn the deaths of Eric
Garner, Trayvon Martin, Michael Brown, Tante Parker, Tamir
Rice, Walter Scott, Breonna Taylor, Ahmaud Arbery, George
Floyd, Tony McDade, and countless other victims of police brutality and racist violence. We recognize that current protests are a
response to longstanding systemic injustices that target and disproportionately impact the Black community. These injustices
include mass incarceration, inadequate access to quality health
care and educational resources, and inequitable access to stable
sources of food, safe and affordable housing, and gainful employment.
As school psychologists, we have an ethical responsibility to
engage in social justice and antiracist action. School psychology
organizations and graduate education programs play an important
role in shaping future generations of school psychologists to lead
the mental health, educational and research, and advocacy initiatives that promote equity for school personnel, students, families,
and communities they serve. This is possible only if our field
acknowledges, evaluates, and works to reconstruct existing systems, structures, and policies that lead to inequitable outcomes for
some groups and not others. “How can the school psychology
community serve the diverse society in which we live without
explicit and intentional education and growth in this area?” To
help answer this question, APA Division 16, Trainers of School
Psychologists, the Council of Directors of School Psychology
Programs, the Society for the Study of School Psychology, the
American Board of School Psychology, and the National Association of School Psychologists have come together to reaffirm our
commitment to ensure current and future school psychologists are
empowered to be antiracist agents of change.
A Declaration of Understanding
How can we, as school psychologists, respond to the horrific
displays of racism in recent days and weeks, specifically the recent
deaths of Breonna Taylor, Ahmaud Arbery, and George Floyd?
• Acknowledge the need for action and healing. . . . We are
disheartened by the loss of more Black lives at the hands
of the police.
• Acknowledge that these murders are grounded in our
country’s 400-year history of systemic racism, oppression, and overpolicing of Black individuals and persons of
color.
• Recognize that colleagues of color have been put in the
unfair position of having to shoulder and take on the undue
burden of work related to racism, inequities, bias, and
bigotry, and this can no longer continue.
• Recognize direct traumatic stress that many of us experience daily and in response to the death of George Floyd
and others.
• Stand in solidarity with our Black community members,
colleagues, friends, and neighbors and pledge to do all in
our power to call out, address, and dismantle the systemic
inequities in our society that we may knowingly or unknowingly perpetuate as scholars, practitioners, and
friends.
• Acknowledge that we must confront our own internalized
racism and implicit biases and learn to think and act in
ways that affirm and support our students, staff, faculty,
and community members identifying as Black, African
American, Native American, American Indian/Indigenous, Latinx, Asian American, and Pacific Islander.
• Acknowledge that we must confront explicit biases in
preK-12 schools and university training programs, and
learn to think and act in ways that affirm and support our
students, staff, faculty, and community members identifying as Black, African American, Latinx, Asian American
and Native American, American Indian/Indigenous.
• Promise to support and protect our children of color who
are disproportionately targeted in our schools and communities.
• Recognize that these incidents unfolded while the nation is
still reeling from a health pandemic that further exemplifies the disparate health and economic impacts of coronavirus 2019 on communities of color; requiring us to address the longstanding racial inequities people of color
experience on a daily basis.
• Call out those within our profession who act in ways that
are antithetical to the values we espouse in our declaration
of understanding.
(Appendix continues)
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.
230 CODDING ET AL.• Join our voices to the statements issued by Sandra L. Shullman, Ph.D., the President of the American Psychological
Association, naming this as a racism pandemic, and “as
always, APA stands against racism and hate in all its forms
and supports the efforts of researchers, law enforcement,
clinicians, teachers, and policymakers to eliminate hate
crimes and police brutality,” and National Association of
School Psychologists’ definition of social justice.
• Recognize that social justice is both a process and a goal that
requires action. “School psychologists work to ensure the
protection of the educational rights, opportunities, and wellbeing of all children, especially those whose voices have
been muted, identities obscured, or needs ignored. Social
justice requires promoting nondiscriminatory practices and
the empowerment of families and communities. School psychologists enact social justice through culturally responsive
professional practice and advocacy to create schools, communities, and systems that ensure equity and fairness for all
children and youth” (adopted by the National Association of
School Psychologists Board of Directors, April 2017).
Our Action Plan as a Community
We recognize that statements are not enough and that it is
imperative for us, individually and collectively, to work proactively to influence and enact change. Therefore, we provide some
suggestions for direct action steps to stand in solidarity with our
Black community members, colleagues, friends, and students.
School Psychology’s commitment and mission to advance research,
practice, policy, and advocacy for education continues. In light of this
tragedy, we have a sharpened focus to reduce systemic racism and
inequities in schools and communities across our nation. We must
take affirmative action through active antiracist work.
• We will create a library of resources for trainers and
programs on social justice, equity, and inclusion to begin
establishing a general body of literature.
• We will establish a mentoring program to provide earlycareer psychologists and students, especially those of color,
with increased opportunities for collaboration and support.
• We reaffirm our support of our student school psychology
organizations with financial support, collaboration, and guidance with their own mentoring programs and professional
development.
• We will actively recruit diverse voices for leadership positions within our professional organizations and committees.
• We commit to ensuring that diverse voices are engaged and
represented across issues before the field.
• We commit to ensuring that our scholarly outlets (e.g., journals, newsletters) regularly include science and research inclusive of voices and perspectives of scholars and communities of color.
• We commit to using psychological science to combat systemic racism and implicit bias at all levels to foster change
including:
X Training, supporting, and collaborating with school
personnel, parents, and other community stakeholders
in advancing safe schools that are inclusive of policies
addressing racism and other forms of discrimination
and actions that embody these policies.
X Preparing decision makers to collect information that
includes representation from all relevant groups, informed by sources that are fair, and to deliver responses
that are culturally sensitive.
X Preparing current and future school psychologists to
engage in public policy advocacy, even when politically difficult, to combat systemic racism and implicit
bias at all levels to foster change.
X Mentoring and supporting researchers of color in research publications.
• We recommit to addressing these structural and pervasive
challenges in our training programs, research, and service
activities addressing decision making, representation, sensitivity, and fairness.
In solidarity,
APA Division 16 School Psychology
Trainers of school psychologists
Council of Directors of School Psychology Programs
Society for the Study of School Psychology
American Board of School Psychology
National Association of School Psychologists
Received June 11, 2020
Accepted June 11, 2020 
Table A1
Acknowledging Contributors
Enedina García-Vázquez Linda Reddy
Prerna Arora Shane Jimerson Kisha Radliff
Franci Crepeau-Hobson Celeste Malone Tara Raines
Pam Fenning Tammy Hughes Sam Song
Clifford Hatt Kathleen Minke Kelly Vaillancourt Strobach
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.
SCHOOL PSYCHOLOGY REFLECTIONS 231Responses to Comments Related to our School Psychology Unified
Anti-Racism Statement and Call to Action
The School Psychology Unified Anti-Racism Statement and Call to Action writing team proudly
committed to work to be anti-racism agents of change. As our focus was on racism, we did not
include the role that intersectionality plays in Black lives and other lives of color. This was a missed
opportunity as we named Tony McDade, but did not expand on how intersectional bias contributes
to heinous acts. As a community that believes it is important to recognize the role of intersectionality in racism and to support people of color, inclusive of their intersectionality, we acknowledge
the following:
● Acknowledge that persons with intersecting marginalized identities – particularly those who
identify as Black and transgender – experience significant discrimination, harassment, violence, and murder. These unspeakable acts often go unreported, resulting in a lack of
awareness of injustice among persons with intersecting identities.
● Seek to understand how individuals with multiple marginalized identities may experience
unique challenges and greater disparities in developmental, health, social, psychological,
educational, and economic access and outcomes.
● Promise to support and protect our children of color, especially girls of color, who are often
targets of abuse and discipline that go unrecognized, and those who identify as transgender
and are disproportionately targeted in our schools and communities.
Our action plan will include those with intersecting identities including those subjected to LGBTQ
bias. We commit to using psychological science to combat systemic racism, intersectional bias and
implicit bias at all levels to foster change including training and preparing researchers to conduct
and consume intersectional, decolonizing, anti-racist applied school psychology research.
We acknowledge that while our original statement will remain, our work will continue to evolve as
we move forward with our action plan. We appreciate and welcome comments that help us with our
process.
We thank Kelly Edyburn for her guidance on addressing other forms of injustice.
Acknowledging Contributors
Enedina Garcia-Vázquez
Prerna Arora
Franci Crepeau-Hobson
Pam Fenning
Clifford Hatt
Linda Reddy
Shane Jimerson
Celeste Malone
Tammy Hughes
Kathleen Minke
Kisha Radliff
Tara Raines
Sam Song
Kelly Vaillancourt Strobach
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.
232 CODDING ET AL




NEW PAPER


A research agenda for the post-COVID-19 world: Theory and
research in social psychology
Dolores Albarracin, and Haesung Jung
Department of Psychology and Gies College of Business, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Champaign,
Illinois, USA
The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has likely been
circulating around the globe since November 2019. At
the time of writing in January 2020, the New York Times
COVID-19 tracker documented 90.3 million+ cases and
1.9 million+ deaths (“Coronavirus World Map,”). In
addition to the sky-high morbidity and mortality rates
brought by the pandemic, the global and local outbreaks
have dislocated economies and social conditions. As
reviewed by Dennis (2020), the Asian Development
Bank announced that COVID-19 could cost the global
economy between $5.8 and $8.8 trillion. The estimated
number of jobs lost has been 81 million in the Asian
Pacific region (International Labour Organization,
2020a), 30 million in Latin America and the Caribbean
2020 (International Labour Organization, 2020), and 22
million in the United States (Ponciano, 2020).
Unprecedented devastation reinstates old scientific
questions and brings new ones. For social psychologists
who study attitudes, persuasion, self-regulation, or behavioural change, these questions are inspired by the need
to systematically identify the content of persuasive messages, the self-regulatory consequences of the pandemic,
the processing of prevalence and incidence information,
and changes to prosocial behaviour and group identities
brought about by the pandemic.
Developing and Selecting Public Health
Messages
The pandemic has brought the imperative of producing a
rapid and flexible public health response to address
rapidly evolving risks. It underscores the lack of evidence-based guidelines on how to select message and
intervention contents to change attitudes and behaviours.
Traditionally, the approach to selecting beliefs or themes
for a health-promotion campaign has been to rely on (a)
intuition and loosely designed market probes or (b) theory with identification of salient beliefs.
Creative ad agencies illustrate the use of intuition and
fairly informal market research such as focus groups. An
iconic example of a health campaign designed by
advertisers is Truth. Some of the Truth efforts have been
documented in academic publications. For example,
Hicks (2001) wrote an article explaining some of the
decisions made in the campaign as implemented in the
state of Florida (Sly et al., 2001). He related that they
designed the campaign by interacting with young people,
including through focus groups, and considering products
that had been successfully marketed with youth. The
main breakthrough concerned the realisation that young
people smoked to feel “in control.” Therefore, the designers reasoned that making young people rebel against
manipulation from the tobacco industry could be a successful approach. The team also went for surprise in the
ad executions. In Hick’s words: “Like any engaging
brand, the creative work had to surprise and lead the target rather than be based on images they expected” (p. 4).
Theory can act as a guide for campaign or intervention design as well. For example, one could use a reasoned action approach (Ajzen & Albarracın, 2007; Ajzen
et al., 2018) or the information-motivation-behavioral
skills model (Fisher et al., 2006) to make decisions
about what behavioural precursors to target. Messages
can create new norms or make health behaviours appear
more desirable. They may increase self-efficacy or provide training in behavioural skills. Once research establishes if a behaviour is controlled by attitudes, norms,
and/or self-efficacy, there are methods to elicit underlying salient beliefs. For example, one may ask questions
about the positive and negative outcomes of performing
a behaviour, and outcomes listed by at least 10% of the
population would be deemed salient (Ajzen & Fishbein,
1980).
The COVID-19 pandemic has required and will continue to require designing campaigns and other interventions to encourage health behaviours such as maskwearing and vaccination. Social psychologists facing this
daunting task, however, will find both the intuitive and
theoretical approaches only partially satisfying. Let us
assume that we determine a possible belief or emotional
reaction to address. At this point, the following questions
arise: (a) Of multiple candidate beliefs, how should we
decide which ones to choose? (b) How many of these
beliefs could we address? (c) Can these beliefs be
additively combined without detriment? (d) Should we
prioritise beliefs based on theory or intuition?
Correspondence: Dolores Albarracin, University of Illinois at
Urbana Champaign, 603 E. Daniel St., Champaign, Illinois
61820, USA. E-mail: dalbarra@illinois.edu
Received 20 January 2021; accepted 22 January 2021.
© 2021 Asian Association of Social Psychology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.
Asian Journal of Social Psychology (2021), 24, 10–17 DOI: 10.1111/ajsp.12469
bs_bs_bannerAsian Journal of Social PsychologyWe believe that social psychologists are ideally poised
to address these questions and to design methods to
design messages in a systematic fashion. One approach
would be to integrate theory and data-driven methods.
As an illustration, one could gather data on salient
beliefs from an elicitation study, from health personnel
who have direct contact with those who need to be
encouraged to perform preventive behaviours, and from
experts who can provide solutions based on theory.
However, this procedure could lead to six beliefs from
an elicitation study, four additional thematic recommendations from health personnel, and a number of variables
from theory. Threat models like the protection motivation theory (Floyd et al., 2000; Maddux & Rogers, 1983;
Tannenbaum et al., 2015) incorporate threat, which
includes perceptions of risk or susceptibility as well as
perceptions of severity, and efficacy perceptions, which
comprise the sense that the recommended behaviour will
avert the threat. Normative approaches such as those by
Cialdini and colleagues (Cialdini, 2003; Cialdini et al.,
1991) would prescribe highlighting approval for and
actual performance of the recommended behaviour in
the population. The reasoned action approach (Ajzen &
Albarracın, 2007) would recommend addressing norms
as well as the outcomes of the behaviour, with the
caveat that the importance of norms and attitudes should
be first verified in the population under study. Socialcognitive theory (Bandura, 2001), as well as the reasoned action approach (Ajzen & Albarracın, 2007),
would recommend inducing perceptions of control over
the behaviour. Integrative models such as the information-motivation-behavioral skills model (Fisher et al.,
2006) and the health belief model (Janz & Becker,
1984) would incorporate norms, attitudes, self-efficacy,
and behavioural skills.
The review of possible theory-based recommendations
up to this point includes six theories and six possible
themes to address in an intervention. Reactance theory
(Brehm, 1966) would further suggest a strategy that
emphasises people’s freedom to engage in the behaviour,
particularly for those who do not oppose the recommended measures. Social determination theory (Deci &
Ryan, 2012; Ryan & Deci, 2006) would also highlight
the opposition between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation,
recommending that interventions promote a sense of
autonomy (Hagger & Chatzisarantis, 2014). Together,
the reactance and social determination theories suggest
autonomy as an additional theme to introduce in an
intervention.
Action goal theory (Albarracin, 2021) provides further
themes for intervention. In particular, people can confront a challenge by setting general goals for action or
setting more specific goals and plans. Because the pandemic has forced people to be inactive, instilling a
general goal for action may be beneficial. However,
general action goals are insufficient guides for behaviour
and thus require setting specific goals as well.
Consequently, additional intervention themes include a
general appeal to action and the benefits of combining
such an appeal with more specific goals.
Altruism is also relevant to health behaviours that
have benefits not only for the self but also for the community at-large (Alessandri et al., 2009; Grant & Gino,
2010). In the context of the pandemic, people report
greater intentions to wash their hands and practice social
distancing to prevent the coronavirus when public (vs.
private) benefits of doing so are emphasised (Jordan
et al., 2020). People also report higher intentions to vaccinate when considering its benefit to others than its benefit to themselves (Betsch et al., 2013). Altruisic
motivation alone may not always produce desirable
health behaviours, however. For example, Jung and
Albarracın (2021) showed that highlighting the social
benefits of vaccination is more effective in encouraging
vaccination when people believe that their actions will
make a personal impact on others. Even a subtle contextual cue like social density can affect perceptions of personal impact, such that people living in less (vs. more)
crowded areas are more responsive to prosocial appeals
for vaccination because they expect their behaviour to
have a greater community impact.
Other important themes may also be inferred from the
altruism literature. For example, because people often
attach more value to activities that require more pain
and effort (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959; Olivola &
Shafir, 2013), contributing time to a charitable cause is
considered more valuable than contributing money (Reed
et al., 2007, 2016). When it comes to vaccine development, investments of time and effort may also be more
appreciated than investments of money, conferring more
trust in vaccine developers. Trust may also increase by
merely providing information about the rigor of the vaccine development process.
In addition, political psychology has uncovered different values associated with conservative and liberal ideology (Albarracin & Shavitt, 2018). Individualising values,
defining of liberal ideology, include concern about caring, nurturing, and protecting vulnerable individuals
from harm (Graham et al., 2009). Binding values, defining of conservative ideology, involve ingroup loyalty,
authority, respect, and purity (Graham et al., 2009).
Research on value-based persuasion has compared two
messages: “Show your love for all of humanity and the
world in which we live by helping to care for our vulnerable natural environment,” and “Show your love for
your country by joining the fight to protect the purity of
America’s natural environment” (Wolsko et al., 2016).
Although liberals supported environmental conservation
© 2021 Asian Association of Social Psychology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.
Social psychology post-COVID-19: An agenda 11regardless of the appeal, conservatives were more
persuaded by the binding message than they were by
either the individualising message or a control message
(Wolsko et al., 2016).
A review of just eight theories would provide at least
eight themes to explore, but how are researchers and
practitioners to make these decisions? To begin, designing interventions should go beyond one preferred theory
and incorporate all of the factors that will maximise
recipients’ benefits. Thus, a method of empirically reducing these themes seems necessary. To demonstrate, we
conducted a study to test a possible method to select
promising combinations of messages by implementing a
factorial design and then estimating the size of the
effects of particular combinations of message themes.
The design was a 2 (autonomy) 9 3 (goals) 9 3 (values) 9 4 (investment) 9 2 (prosociality) 9 2 (vaccine
development) 9 4 (norms), which resulted in 2,304
combinations. To reduce the number of dimensions, we
randomly assigned a group of 507 participants (recruited
from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, 258 females,
Mage = 41.18, SDage = 12.29) to the cells of this factorial
design. They were presented with one message and then
reported their intentions to receive the vaccine. The measures of intention included “Will you get vaccinated
once the COVID-19 vaccine is available to you?”
(0 = no, 1 = not sure, 2 = yes); “Do you plan to get
vaccinated with the COVID-19 vaccine as soon as you
can?” (1 = very unlikely, 2 = unlikely, 3 = likely,
4 = very likely). The items demonstrated a high internal
consistency (a = .89). These items were first standardised and then were averaged to create a single score of
vaccination intention. This score was then used to estimate the average impact of combinations of two or three
factors, thus obtaining the means for the cells of all of
the two- and three-way interactions. This procedure
allowed us to select two groups of messages, one with
means between 1 z and 2 z, and another with means
above 2 z. We are currently testing this method’s efficacy for the selection of message contents.
Mental Health Impacts and SelfRegulation
The COVID-19 pandemic has raised concerns about its
impact on mental health (Farkhad & Albarracın, 2020;
Riehm et al., 2020). However, we believe that the most
insidious psychological problems during the pandemic
concern inability to regulate behaviour and protect oneself from infection with the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Research on collective forms of self-regulation is thus
critical to illuminate the dynamic of behaviours such as
mask wearing and social distancing within the population. For example, what is the impact of isolation on
loneliness and, in turn, the inability to avoid social
gatherings? What is the impact of fear on similar processes, and does promoting the idea that the pandemic
causes mental health problems increase people’s
tendency to ignore preventive recommendations?
Research on how isolation and social networks affect
the regulation of specific behaviours is critical.
Typically, social support has been studied in relation to
mental health, with research showing that having emotional and instrumental help decreases the risk of depression and other symptoms (Kessler & McLeod, 1985;
Lakey & Orehek, 2011; Turner et al., 1983). However,
the effect of others on self-regulation goes beyond soothing to affect our planning, long-term orientation and
selection of beneficial courses of action. Thus, when a
pandemic cuts social links, it may deprive individuals
from the mechanisms of social regulation of behaviour.
This is an important area of research for the future.
How People Use Risk Information:
Impact of Prevalence and Incidence
Health statistics have dominated the news and public
health communications since the beginning of the pandemic. Curves representing accumulation of cases are
displayed daily, mainly in interactive forms. These
curves present two key epidemiological metrics: (a)
prevalence and (b) incidence. Prevalence is the number
of people who have a disease per 100,000 inhabitants at
any given time; incidence is the rate of occurrence of
new cases for a given time period, such as the number
of new cases per 100,000 inhabitants per day, month, or
year.
Although prevalence and incidence are important
markers of the course of a pandemic, how people interpret and use each type of information is not clear. In
theory, prevalence could signal the level of infectivity of
a population and thus the potential to contract the disease within a geographic area. Correspondingly, incidence allows for both inferences about undiagnosed
cases as well as inferences about the behavioural norm
of a population. For example, if incidence is low, we
may conclude that prevalence may be the tip of the iceberg, signalling a large rate of yet-undiagnosed infections. However, if incidence is high, we may conclude
that people are currently not following the recommended
behaviours, which may lead us to follow suit and ignore
public health recommendations.
Despite their importance for both understanding
human behaviour during a pandemic and designing public health communications, these issues have not been
addressed in past research. Therefore, social psychologists could investigate the degree to which people pay
attention to prevalence and incidence, and their na€ıve
© 2021 Asian Association of Social Psychology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.
12 Dolores Albarracin and Haesung Junginterpretations of the meaning of these indexes. It would
also be important to examine if these determinations are
made in an elaborative or a spontaneous fashion, and
whether and when they inform behavioural decisions.
Dissemination of Information Within
Networks
Even though public policy to address the COVID-19
pandemic has focused on individuals staying at home,
exercising social distance, or seeking care when necessary, pandemics, by definition, go beyond individuals.
People make decisions about how to behave on the basis
of not only their individual interpretation of public
health communications and mandates but also their
observations of what others are doing. Up to this point,
however, scientific understanding of those observations
is limited in two ways. First, even though there is a rich
and important literature on normative influences (Becker
et al., 2017; Centola, 2019b; Watts, 2004), our theories
and evidence base about normative influences within
digital networks have only scratched the surface.
Second, surprisingly, the literature on norms (Albarracın
& Shavitt, 2018; Cialdini & Goldstein, 2004; Schultz
et al., 2019) has not been integrated with the literature
on behavioural influences on attitudes, leading to an
absence of a lens to study contexts where people are
both observers and actors.
Prior work has examined diffusion of information and
behaviour as a function of network properties, including
tie-strength (Granovetter, 1973, 1983), tie-asymmetry
(Almaatouq et al., 2016), and homophily (Becker et al.,
2017; Centola, 2010, 2019a), among other factors.
Despite its great advances, this prior work has not studied generalisation processes (Albarracın & Handley,
2011; Albarracın et al., 2008, 2018, 2019; Hepler &
Albarracın, 2013, 2014; Jiang et al., 2014) or the reciprocal influences of attitude (i.e., evaluation) on behaviour
(overt actions including, in our case, posting a badge)
and of behaviour on attitudes (Albarracin, 2021;
Albarracın & Wyer, 2000; Glasman & Albarracın,
2006). Although behaviours that make use of our automatic, reflexive processes (e.g., posture) may easily be
adopted by mimicry (Albarracin, 2021), understanding
how attitudes influence collective adoption of behaviours
that require deliberation (e.g., violating social distancing)
is key in public health contexts.
When a person posts an image or a badge on social
media, it can lead to the emergence of additional posts
that set an agenda (i.e., the central topic of the posts).
The agenda is naturally set to be general if one views
(a) a post like the ones in the top of Figure 1. In contrast, the agenda is naturally set to be specific if one
views (b) one of the specific posts in the bottom of
Figure 1. This agenda in turn can lead people in this network to form general attitudes (e.g., toward support for
COVID-19 efforts) or specific attitudes (e.g., toward taking vitamin C to prevent infection with SARS-CoV-2).
When the agenda is general, the presence of risky behaviours within the network poses the risk of producing a
general risky attitude than does the presence of health
behaviours within the network. Thus, a general agenda
can amplify risk via generalisation of this risk.
Human Prosociality
Because all behaviours designed to prevent infections
protect not only the actor but also society at large, the
pandemic serves as a reminder that our decisions have
consequences for other people. Accordingly, a considerable body of research has highlighted how prosocial
(i.e., self-transcendent) concerns can motivate COVID19 prevention behaviours (Jordan et al., 2020;
Pfattheicher et al., 2020) and vaccination (Jung &
Albarracin, 2021). Less is known, however, about the
implications of the COVID-19 pandemic itself on people’s prosociality. We discuss several hypotheses that
warrant attention.
The restrictions imposed by the pandemic have
brought considerable losses in terms of social contact,
jobs, and other elements of one’s safety net. These personal adversities may impair people’s ability to attend to
others’ needs because individuals need cognitive and
motivational resources to implement actions in the service of the common good (DeWall et al., 2008; Xu
et al., 2012). An important question is then how to
encourage concern for others while helping individuals
deal with their own hardships. We propose that shifting
people’s focus from the impact of the pandemic on them
personally onto similar impacts on other people may
simultaneously increase the ability to find solutions for
one’s personal problems while also heightening concern
for other people. The rationale is that people are more
sympathetic toward others who share similar experiences
(Loewenstein & Small, 2007) and that merely perceiving
that others are going through similar difficulties as one’s
own can increase intentions to seek help (GageBouchard et al., 2017) and promote personal resilience
(Walsh, 2007).
In addition, cultures vary in the extent to which they
primarily construe the pandemic as an individual experience (e.g., how it has impacted me) or a collective/
shared experience (e.g., how it has impacted us). This
difference could in turn yield different prosocial outcomes across cultures during and postpandemic. Indeed,
collectivistic (vs. individualistic) cultures, which are
more likely to view the pandemic as a shared experience, cooperate more to perform COVID-19 preventive
© 2021 Asian Association of Social Psychology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.
Social psychology post-COVID-19: An agenda 13behaviours (Huang et al., 2020; Pei et al., 2020). What
is not known, however, is whether, because of the pandemic, those in collectivistic cultures also engage in
more mutual support in other domains (e.g., social isolation, economic challenges) and therefore are less negatively impacted by the pandemic psychologically (e.g.,
less COVID-19 related depression) compared to those in
individualistic cultures.
The pandemic also has highlighted new ways in which
people can help others. Prepandemic, large charity networks (e.g., United Nations Childre’s Fund) served as a
primary vehicle to coordinate donations and volunteering
(givingusa.org). During the pandemic, however, communities created new solutions to support people in need,
such as ordering more takeout from local restaurants,
continuing to pay for local services they could not use
during lockdowns, and paying for COVID-19 tests for
neighbours with limited financial means (“How individuals in the U.S. helped their neighbors through Covid19,” CNBC News, 2020; “Italians pay it forward by collecting donations for COVID tests,” CBS News, 2021).
Importantly, these smaller community-based efforts were
able to address the challenges posed by the pandemic
more quickly and more effectively than were big charity
networks (Ward, 2020). New research questions could
thus involve how the pandemic has changed people’s
philanthropic priorities. For example, the pandemic may
have increased people’s preference to give through local
rather than national or global community organisations,
Moreover, people may also be more attentive to those
who are spatially closer (e.g., their neighbours) and prefer to help them more than people who are farther away.
Alternatively, cooperation in smaller community networks could have a ripple effect on large-scale cooperation, with local experiences of mutual support within
their own communities extending to other communities
and countries as well.
Changes to Group Identity
One of the most noticeable restrictions of the pandemic
has been on physical boundaries, including reduced ability and motivation to travel to other countries and bans
to the entry of foreign nationals into countries. An
important question for social psychologists is whether
these measures have increased or decreased the salience
of national identities. At least three possible mechanisms
could increase nationalism. First, the restrictions may
Figure 1 Examples of social media posts on preventing COVID-19. [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelib
rary.com]
© 2021 Asian Association of Social Psychology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.
14 Dolores Albarracin and Haesung Jungsimply amplify the distance between one’s nation and
others (Tajfel, 1981). Second, the restrictions are signals
that excluding other groups is the norm and may model
xenophobia (Tankard & Paluck, 2016). Third, travel
restrictions that reduce globalisation and immigration
may limit exposure to social diversity and lead to the
perception that one’s own group is the norm (Briley
et al., 2013; Gerbner et al., 1980, 1982). The decline in
social diversity is likely to be more prominent in regions
that were less ethnically diverse to begin with, including
South Korea and Hong Kong.
Decreases in the salience of group boundaries are possible as well, given that most communications during the
pandemic were conducted online. Physical location has
currently little influence on how people go about doing
work, attending workshops, or connecting with others.
Therefore, during the pandemic, people may have
increasingly relied on individuating characteristics (e.g.,
personality) when evaluating and interacting with others,
and correspondingly less on characteristics associated
with their physical location, such as nationality, race,
and ethnicity. Indeed, focusing on individuating information has been shown to reduce stereotyping in implicit
and explicit person perception (Rubinstein et al., 2018).
However, whether indeed the pandemic has magnified or
minimised perceived differences among groups, and its
consequences for intergroup cooperation, should be systematically addressed in future research.
Final Note
The extraordinary circumstances of the COVID-19 pandemic have raised a number of theoretical and practical
challenges for traditional fields within social psychology.
One challenge will be identifying and testing systematic
methods to develop and integrate contents for health
campaigns and interventions. Even though a number of
theories can inspire these decisions, contents are population-specific and must be combined in a meaningful and
efficacious way. Another challenge is defining and investigating the pandemic’s impacts on not only depression
and anxiety but also externalizing behaviours. The
COVID-19 pandemic has created a new spectrum of
impulsive behaviour. In addition to traditional manifestations such as substance use, the new behaviours involve
risky socialisation and ignoring fairly nuanced health
recommendations.
The pandemic has also introduced a number of questions about social networks and cooperative behaviour.
irstSocial media networks have become in many cases
the only way in which people have social contact; therefore, the mechanisms of transmission of behavioural
norms and attitudes are key and need to be investigated
in new ways. We propose to research generalisation
processes and methods of encapsulating risky behaviours
while amplifying healthy ones. Furthermore, explicating
the forms in which people might seek prosocial goals
while they also satisfy individual ones will be important,
as will investigating generalisation of specific prosocial
goals to new arenas. Finally, the pandemic has highlighted the possible impact of travel restrictions on group
and other forms of national identity.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest with respect to their authorship or the publication of
this article.




NEW PAPER





https://doi.org/10.1177/0022167820937498
Journal of Humanistic Psychology
2020, Vol. 60(5) 611–625
© The Author(s) 2020
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions 
DOI: 10.1177/0022167820937498
journals.sagepub.com/home/jhp
Article
Psychology and 
Surveillance Capitalism: 
The Risk of Pushing 
Mental Health Apps 
During the COVID-19 
Pandemic
Lisa Cosgrove1, Justin M. Karter1 , 
Zenobia Morrill1 , and Mallaigh McGinley1
Abstract
During the COVID-19 pandemic, telehealth technologies and mental health apps 
have been promoted to manage distress in the public and to augment existing 
mental health services. From a humanistic perspective, the promotion and use 
of mobile apps raises ethical concerns regarding the autonomy of the person 
using the app. However, there are other dangers that arise when technological 
fixes are embraced at a time of crisis. Naomi Klein and Shoshanna Zuboff have 
recently warned about disaster and surveillance capitalism—using crises to pass 
legislation that will benefit the rich and deepen inequality, and using anonymized 
behavioral data for commercial purposes. This analysis reveals that mental 
health apps may take individuals at their most vulnerable and make them part of 
a hidden supply chain for the marketplace. We provide a case study of a mental 
health app that uses digital phenotyping to predict negative mood states. We 
describe the logic of digital phenotyping and assess the efficacy data on which 
claims of its validity are based. Drawing from the frameworks of disaster and 
surveillance capitalism, we also use a humanistic psychology lens to identify the 
ethical entanglements and the unintended consequences of promoting and using 
this technology during the COVID-19 pandemic.
1
University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA, USA
Corresponding Author:
Justin M. Karter, Department of Counselling and School Psychology, University of 
Massachusetts Boston, 100 Morrissey Boulevard W-2-163, Boston, MA 02125-3300, USA. 
Email: justin.karter001@umb.edu
937498JHPXXX10.1177/0022167820937498Journal of Humanistic PsychologyCosgrove et al.
research-article2020612 Journal of Humanistic Psychology 60(5)
Keywords
COVID 19, humanistic psychology, surveillance capitalism, disaster 
capitalism, mental health apps
As psychologists and other mental health professionals struggle to provide 
services in a time of social distancing, telehealth initiatives and technologies 
have been promoted to manage distress in the public at large as well as to 
augment treatment for those already engaged in mental health services. 
Telehealth (providing health care remotely by means of telecommunications 
technology) and telepsychology (the use of various modalities [e.g., Zoom] 
to assist clients with behavioral and mental health needs) are becoming 
increasingly common. However, during crises of this magnitude, there is the 
potential to uncritically adopt interventions, such as mental health apps, that 
may not be effective and that may also pose privacy risks. Additionally, from 
a humanistic perspective, the promotion and use of such mobile apps should 
be approached cautiously because of ethical concerns regarding the agency 
and autonomy of the person using the app.
However, there are other dangers that arise when technological fixes are 
embraced at a time of crisis. Naomi Klein (2020) recently warned about disaster 
capitalism—how political and economic elites are using COVID-19 to pass legislation and policies that will benefit the rich and deepen inequality. The framework of disaster capitalism can also serve to highlight the dangers of artificial 
intelligence (AI) surveillance when telehealth technologies, such as mobile apps, 
are too quickly promoted during the pandemic. We need to pay attention to the 
ways in which behavioral data that are captured through telehealth technologies 
may be repurposed for commercial uses. For example, the term surveillance 
capitalism (Zuboff, 2019c) is utilized to better understand the potential harms 
that come with our anonymized behavioral data being sent to third-party entities 
whenever we interface with the internet—whether that is through social media or 
by downloading mobile apps. Thus, mental health apps may not be a benign way 
to reach people with mental health needs in a time of social distancing.
In the following commentary, we provide a case study of Mindstrong, a 
company that developed a mobile app that uses digital phenotyping to predict 
the development of new mental health conditions (e.g., depression) and to 
detect the worsening of symptoms in users with a preexisting mental disorder. Drawing from the frameworks of disaster and surveillance capitalism, 
we use a humanistic psychology lens to identify the ethical entanglements 
and the unintended consequences of promoting and using this technology 
during the COVID-19 pandemic.Cosgrove et al. 613
The COVID-19 Pandemic, Disaster Capitalism, and 
the Mental Health App Push
According to the history of “disaster capitalism” outlined by Klein (2007), 
moments of economic crisis are often used by industry and powerful special 
interest groups to push through unpopular legislation that deepens inequality 
and undermines civil rights. The COVID-19 pandemic is already being used by 
governments to forward neoliberal economic policies and roll back regulations 
and civil rights protections (Adams, 2020). There have been increasing reports 
of distress in response to the pandemic in the public at large and clinicians suddenly have found that they are not able to meet in person with their clients. 
Both of these conditions have created the type of ideological environment that 
Klein (2017) argues is conducive to the machinations of disaster capitalism.
As social distancing restrictions began to impede in-person mental health 
treatments across the United States, leading medical journals such as The 
New England Journal of Medicine and The Lancet ran commentaries calling 
for the rapid expansion of remote service options beyond video sessions. In 
these commentaries, there was a clear emphasis on the urgent need to remove 
legal barriers that would prevent the widespread use of novel telehealth initiatives (e.g., Keesara et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020). While some experts 
sought to normalize the experience of emotional distress during a crisis 
(Pfefferbaum & North, 2020), others raised the alarm arguing that “urgent 
action is required to transform health care delivery and to scale up our systems by unleashing the power of digital technologies” (Keesara et al., 2020, 
p. 1). In fact, when China moved mental health treatment to remote care during the initial outbreak, public policy experts recommended the use of AI 
screening programs and surveillance tools as a means to develop innovative 
telehealth platforms that could improve the effectiveness of clinical and 
emergency interventions (Liu et al., 2020). Other countries have also moved 
to ease regulations on telepsychology practices. For example, in the United 
States, the Department of Health and Human Services Office for Civil Rights 
changed its policies to reduce privacy protections. In March 2020, the 
Department of Health and Human Services Office for Civil Rights announced 
that it would waive penalties for Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act violations against health care providers that used insecure 
communication technologies, such as FaceTime or Skype, during the COVID19 pandemic (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Service, 2020).
The push to expand telepsychology services and ease privacy restrictions 
goes beyond video visits and includes the dissemination of mental health 
apps designed to augment or replace traditional mental health services. These 
apps have proliferated over the last few years because they are easy to use, 614 Journal of Humanistic Psychology 60(5)
accessible, portable, and can reach people who do not seek help because of 
financial and other reasons. Past research on mental health apps has raised 
significant concerns about the lack of privacy protections and the potential 
for overdiagnosis. In fact, a review of 61 mental health apps found that the 
language used by these tools often promoted a flawed and pathologizing message that emotional responses to real life stressors are the result of abnormal 
neurophysiology (Parker et al., 2018).
Researchers have also found that the majority of these apps are not transparent about how they collect data and how that data will be used. A recent 
review of mental health apps found that 81% of apps sent data to Facebook 
or Google for use in data analytics or marketing and 92% sent that data to 
other third parties. The authors concluded, “users [of these mental health 
apps] are denied an informed choice about whether such sharing is acceptable to them [emphasis added]” (Huckvale et al., 2019). Despite these privacy concerns, policy makers have rushed to promote the use of mental 
health apps during the pandemic. In one example, the State of New York 
recently collaborated with Headspace to provide its mental health app to 
New Yorkers for free in response to the pandemic (Headspace, 2020).
From Biomarkers to Digital Phenotyping: Using 
Human–Computer Interactions to Predict Mood
Every app is shunting your data to 3rd parties. The two goliaths [in this 
marketplace] are Facebook and Google. This means that when you download 
an app—it doesn’t stop there—[your anonymized behavioral surplus data] is 
going to 3rd parties, primarily Facebook and Google. (Zuboff, 2019d)
Mental health apps vary in scope. Some apps, for example, Headspace, 
provide tips on meditation and improving sleep but do not offer diagnostic or 
therapeutic services such as access to a therapist. Other mental health apps go 
well beyond offering mindfulness and CBT-based interventions and use complex machine learning algorithms and AI to attempt to predict and diagnose 
mental distress based on users’ digital fingerprints. Mindstrong, a Silicon 
Valley-based start-up and self-described as a health care and tech company 
hybrid, is the current leader in the use of this technology. The former Chief 
Technology Officer of the antipiracy software company, MarkMonitor Inc., 
Paul Dagum, founded the company in 2014. Thomas Insel, former director of 
the National Institute of Mental Health, and Richard Klausner, the founder 
and director of Juno Therapeutics (a pharmaceutical company), are cofounders. In the world of digital health, Mindstrong is well funded, backed by tens 
of millions from venture capitalist firms, including Bezos Expeditions. In 
May of 2018, the company developed a smartphone app that “can tell you’re Cosgrove et al. 615
depressed before you know it” (Metz, 2018), by using a “paradigm shifting” 
technology.
What if we can detect symptoms getting worse? What if we can predict it? 
We're measuring human-computer interactions, and using machine learning to 
develop breakthrough technology. This technology is integrated into our care 
platform to help guide targeted proactive care. (Mindstrong, 2020a)
The paradigm shifting technology to which Mindstrong refers is digital 
phenotyping. Unlike other mental health apps, Mindstrong is less interested 
in mining content such as health data and explicit personal information. 
Rather, the app’s digital phenotyping is focused on how users interact with 
their smartphones. Scrolling, clicking, tapping, and other touch screen behaviors are analyzed with machine learning to predict their cognition and mood 
(Mindstrong, 2020c). This human–computer interaction model—analyzing 
the way information is presented to the user and repeated measures of a user’s 
response time—is described as “provid[ing] passive, ecological, in-themoment insight into a user’s cognitive and emotional state” (Dagum, 2019, p. 
96). The ecological, real-time information (obtained by tracking and analyzing how digital devices are being used) is theorized to be an approximation 
for mental processing speed. Empirical support for this theory is based on a 
small (N = 27) study that correlated neurocognitive scale results with predictions derived from a kernel principal components analysis of over 1,000 
human–computer interactions (Dagum, 2018, 2019). The aggregated results 
of these interactions (i.e., the patterns and timings of user activity on touch 
screen devices) are referred to as digital “biomarkers.” These digital biomarkers are then keystroke captured with an application running passively in 
the background of the device.
It should be noted that kernel principal components analysis is common in 
biomarker research as it enables detection and analysis of massive amounts of 
data that are related to the variable (often in nonlinear ways) under investigation (Schölkopf et al., 1998; Shiokawa et al., 2018). Yet the central question 
remains: What is the evidence to support use of the use of digital biomarkers 
and phenotyping to predict mental health symptoms and mood disturbances? 
There is one small (N = 23) prospective cohort study registered on clinicaltrials.gov whose aim is to validate Mindstrong’s app (ClinicalTrials.gov, 2017). 
Although the study was completed in May 2019, there are no study results 
posted and no peer-reviewed papers have been published in the scientific literature. Moreover, cognitive tests have not been proven to be accurate predictors of depression (Scult et al., 2017) and there could be many reasons why a 
person is typing more slowly (e.g., they have gloves on). However, in 2019, 
Dagum published a book chapter in which he reports on a subset of 10 of the 616 Journal of Humanistic Psychology 60(5)
23 participants to support Mindstrong’s technology as a potential “continuous 
ecological surrogate for laboratory-based assessments for mood disorders and 
of clinical severity” (Dagum, 2019, p. 101).
When viewed through the lens of disaster capitalism, it is not surprising 
that, despite the limited empirical data to support its product, Mindstrong 
recently modified its website and encouraged viewers to download the app on 
a page titled, “Supporting you through COVID-19” (Mindstrong, 2020b). 
There has been a proliferation of news stories (e.g., Bender & Pannett, 2020; 
Brooks, 2020; Daley, 2020) reporting that mental health conditions, particularly depression and anxiety disorders, are developing or worsening as a 
result of the pandemic. Thus, on the one hand, using a mental health app to 
track one’s mood and mental health appears to be a critical innovation during 
a pandemic and a time of social distancing. In fact, there have been reports 
that use of mental health apps is on the rise since the pandemic began 
(Heilweil, 2020), including one that specifically targets children and adolescents (Staines, 2020). On the other hand, we must also consider the limited 
data available to support the use of digital phenotyping for the prediction of 
mental health conditions, the conflicted nature of the empirical evidence (i.e., 
it appears that one of the cofounders of the company is the only one to date 
that has assessed the efficacy of the company’s product) and the large financial incentive to promote this app. In the following section, we use the framework of surveillance capitalism to identify a less obvious, but equally 
concerning, iatrogenic effect of this technology—the use of users’ data to 
both predict and shape behavior.
Mindstrong and Surveillance Capitalism: Writing 
the Music to Make Them Dance
It is no longer enough to automate information flows about us; the goal now is 
to automate us. (Zuboff as quoted in Naughton, 2019).
Shoshanna Zuboff (2019c) coined the term surveillance capitalism to 
describe a new form of capitalism—a behavioral futures marketplace. The 
term surveillance capitalism, points to the connection between digital tools, 
collecting, and monitoring of data from large swaths of the population, and 
the promotion of consumer-oriented behavior that further the interests of neoliberal capitalism. Significant debates exist regarding how to provide genuine 
informed consent when personal information shared online is used to develop 
targeted advertisements (Smit et al., 2014). What Zuboff exposes, however, 
goes well beyond such debates. She reveals that the most significant data collected and utilized by digital technologies is not the content of what is shared Cosgrove et al. 617
online, but behavioral data about how one navigates the online environment. 
These data are then used to produce advanced predictions of human behavior. 
In an age of surveillance capitalism, it is not just behavioral data, such as 
posting on Facebook that you are going to dinner, that is collected and sold, 
it is the “behavioral surplus data,” concerning “whether you say, ‘I’ll meet 
you later’ or whether you say, ‘I’ll meet you at 6:45,’” that is valued (Zuboff, 
2019b).
Indeed, within this “information panopticon,” Zuboff points out that 
health care apps play a significant role in harvesting this type of meta-data 
and feeding it into the prediction markets and third parties, an architecture of 
power she christens “Big Other” (Zuboff, 2015). This meta-level behavioral 
surplus data is analyzed and utilized or sold for its predictive value:
You download a diabetes app, it takes your phone, it takes your microphone, it 
takes your camera, it takes your contacts. Maybe it helps you manage your 
diabetes a little bit, but it’s also just a part of this whole supply-chain dynamic 
for behavioral surplus flows. The stuff that they’re taking from you has nothing 
to do with the diabetes functionality for which you downloaded the app. 
Absolutely nothing. It’s simply siphoning off data to third parties for other 
revenue streams that are part of these surveillance capitalists’ ecosystems. 
(Zuboff, 2019a)
In light of the fact that the public is looking for (and being encouraged to 
access) mental health advice and services during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
mental health apps like Mindstrong’s, have great appeal. Although users of 
Mindstrong’s app may not be thinking about this, the boundary between predicting mood and shaping or controlling behavior is, of course, tenuous. 
Zuboff quotes one data scientist stating, “We can engineer the context around 
a particular behavior and force change that way. . . . We are learning how to 
write the music, and then we let the music make them dance” (Zuboff, 2019b, 
para. 33). As Hacking’s “looping effect of human kinds” (Hacking, 1995) 
demonstrates, attempts to classify patterns of behavior simultaneously create 
possibilities for subjectivity. The looping effect describes a recursive process 
where the development of new classifications leads those classified to identify with the classification and to increasingly behave in ways that conform 
with the expectations of the classification (Brinkmann, 2005). As the fields of 
psychiatry and psychology develop and propose new constructs for classifying people, these classifications inevitably reflect the philosophical assumptions of those proposing the framework, particularly those concerning agency 
and personhood (Kirmayer & Gómez-Carrillo, 2019). These classifications 
are circulated in societal discourses and reinforced by the machinations of 
institutions, which serves to maintain the perceived legitimacy of the initial 618 Journal of Humanistic Psychology 60(5)
assumptions, limiting possibilities for paradigmatic change. For example, 
when exposed to biomedical explanations for depression, people are more 
likely to attribute causality to stable and internal processes, rather than as the 
result of social and environmental conditions (Lebowitz & Appelbaum, 2019; 
Zimmermann & Papa, 2019). The psy-disciplines, as institutions that often 
posit and legitimate these classifications, participate in the production of 
forms of subjectivity that satisfy the needs of current ideological systems, 
such as neoliberal capitalism, and undermine efforts to reform prevailing 
structures (Cosgrove & Karter, 2018).
Within this framing, mental health apps such as Mindstrong can be understood to operate at a powerful intersection of digital surveillance technologies 
in the service of markets and the cultural legitimacy granted to the psy-disciplines. Casting behavioral surplus data in the seemingly objective and scientific 
language of mental disorders may thus serve to legitimate and naturalize psychiatric classification systems, while simultaneously shaping the behavior of 
the person using the app toward the demands of capitalism. Additionally, casting behavioral data in this way runs counter to a humanistic focus on dignity, 
meaning making, and the sociopolitical determinants of well-being, as the 
needs of the market and the expertise of psy-disciplines reign supreme.
Analyzing the promotion of a mental health app during this pandemic, 
especially when seen through the double lens of disaster and surveillance 
capitalism and from a humanistic perspective, raises complicated ethical 
questions and issues. Even a cursory review of Mindstrong’s disclosure 
reveals that Zuboff’s warning about the siphoning off of behavioral surplus 
data to for-profit entities should be strongly heeded, as the following statements are made:
We may use your Personal Information to create data that is de-identified in 
accordance with HIPAA, other applicable laws and our Organization 
Agreements with applicable Organizations. This de-identified information is 
not Personal Information, because it cannot be used to identify you, and may be 
used by us for any lawful purpose. . . . We may share de-identified information 
and other De-identified Non-Personal Information in all legally permissible 
ways. (Mindstrong, 2019, para. 10-11, Italics added)
The Ethical Entanglements of Promoting Mental 
Health Apps in a Pandemic: Lessons From 
Humanistic Psychology
Humanistic psychologists have historically been at the forefront of challenging conceptual models that reduce human experience to quantifiable Cosgrove et al. 619
measures and metrics (Aanstoos, 2015; Elkins, 2016; Taylor, 1999; Wertz, 
1998); the “third-force” of humanistic psychology arose in opposition to 
behaviorist interventions meant to produce populations “beyond freedom and 
dignity” (DeCarvalho, 1990). Humanistic psychologists remain at the forefront of scholarly opposition and advocacy efforts to reform diagnostic practices based on a limited view of emotional distress (Kamens et al., 2017; 
Kinderman et al., 2020). Although the advent of digital phenotyping presents 
categorizations of behavior patterns of markedly increased complexity, these 
phenotypes remain abstractions based on cognitions and behaviors captured 
within a particular context (e.g., through the use of smartphones). As such, 
there remains the “hard problem” (Chalmers, 2007) that stands between any 
attempt to map diagnoses or phenotypes onto neurobiological processes (see, 
e.g., Karter, 2019). There is also an ethical imperative to avoid measurementbased symptom reduction models that fail to bear witness to the distressed 
person’s unique life circumstances. Thus, claims that digital phenotyping can 
predict neuronal function and mood should be interrogated by philosophical 
and humanistic psychologists alike.
Most important, the algorithmic model on which mental health apps are 
based takes “major depressive disorder” to be the object and neglects the 
unique experiences of the person in the midst of a COVID-19 pandemic. 
Computational analysis substitutes for an empathetic attunement to the lifeworld of the individual, for moods can now be “detected.” However, as 
Heidegger argued, human beings are not rational creatures with neutral mood 
states who may sometimes experience mood episodes (e.g., a “major depressive mood” episode). He invoked the concept of Befindlichkeit in order to 
demonstrate the impossibility of “having” a mood (Stimmung); to be human is 
to always be situated in and attuned to the world (Heidegger, 1927/1962). 
Indeed, the focus on the prediction of moods is antithetical to how humanistic 
psychologists understand personhood. This is because one is always “found” in 
a mood, for emotions engage (or impede engagement) with the (intersubjective) world; Dasein is always immersed in a particular comportment toward the 
concerns of its everyday life and activities. (Heidegger, 1962; see also Cosgrove 
et al., 2019). Thus, measuring human–computer interactions as a proxy for 
understanding a person and predicting their moods reduces the subject to a collection of data points identified by computational systems, and fails to appreciate the fact that people are always “absorbed” in the world at hand—the world 
is the very fabric of Dasein’s existence. The person using the app thus becomes 
reified through mathematical modeling and machine learning—a modern day 
example of Whitehead’s notion of “misplaced concreteness” and James’ 
“vicious abstractionism” (James, 1895; Whitehead, 1926). In this way, digital 
tracking and computational analysis, as a replacement for contemplative 620 Journal of Humanistic Psychology 60(5)
clinical practice, undermines possibilities for agency and autonomy in people 
struggling with emotional distress.
Moreover, it is not only the client’s agency and autonomy that are reduced 
through the use of digital phenotyping, but the clinician’s humanity is similarly reduced, for all that is needed when the app predicts a shift toward a 
negative mood, is a robotic technician. The intuitive talent of the caring professional who strives for a deeply felt attunement to the other (Churchill, 
2014), and the critical importance of contemplative practice, have no place in 
this brave new algorithmic world. Mindstrong, for example, offers 20-minute 
text therapy sessions with “credible therapists” based on techniques such as 
CBT and emotion regulation. Yet no details about what constitutes a credible 
therapist are provided. As humanistic psychologists have long decried, technical training cannot substitute for attunement to the “affairs of consciousness” (Churchill, 2013) or to a depressed or anxious person’s effortful 
existing. Insofar as these “credible therapists” lack conceptual and structural 
competence (Karter & Kamens, 2019), they may very well facilitate unintended human rights violations (e.g., forced treatment). For example, 
Orwellian though it may sound, it is all too easy to imagine that when the 
techno-therapist receives an alert that the person’s digital behavior correlates 
with suicidality, first responders will be called in to hospitalize them.
Conclusion
By conflating well-being with narrowly defined technological fixes, mental 
health apps cannot address the psychosocial and sociopolitical determinants of 
mental health and the context in which people experience emotional distress. 
Clearly, this technology runs counter to humanistic psychology’s appreciation 
for an individual’s unique lifeworld and concomitantly, the importance of contemplative clinical practice. Also, as can be seen in this brief case study, there 
are limited data to support the use of digital phenotyping to predict negative 
mood states and symptom worsening. The double lens of disaster and surveillance capitalism shows that something more nefarious is happening than the 
promotion of a diagnostic tool that is not yet validated. Mental health apps that 
use digital phenotyping and other surveillance technologies position people as 
unwitting profit-makers; they take individuals at their most vulnerable and 
make them part of a hidden supply chain for the marketplace.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the following people for their comments on earlier 
drafts of this article: Rebecca Troeger, ChiaPo Cheng, Meital Simhi, Christine Tosti, 
and Samantha Lilly.Cosgrove et al. 621
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
ORCID iDs
Justin M. Karter https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1971-994X
Zenobia Morrill https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3688-8764




NEW PAPER



1
The psychology of wearing face masks in times of the 
COVID-19 pandemic
Claus-Christian Carbon1,2
1Department of General Psychology and Methodology, University of Bamberg, Germany
Markusplatz 3, D-96047 Bamberg, Bavaria, Germany
2Geomedi University, Tbilisi, Georgia
There was no specific funding available for this research
We declare no competing interests.
Running title: Acceptance of wearing face masks
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35848342
Abstract
Background
Wearing face masks in times of COVID-19 is one of the essential puzzle stones for to 
effectively decrease the rate of new infections and thus, to mitigate the negative 
consequences for individuals as well as the society. Acceptance for wearing masks is still 
low in Europe—many people just feel strange when wearing masks because others do not
wear them. This induces a severe problem for imposing obligations of wearing masks and 
so for keeping the pandemic at bay.
Methods
Eighty-six participants had to assess how strange they felt when wearing a face mask 
while being exposed to displays of groups of persons with varying frequencies of mask 
wearers. Three different types of face masks were shown: simple surgery masks, FFP2 
masks and loop scarfs.
Findings
The mere exposure to social groups wearing masks substantially reduced the strange 
feeling of wearing a mask. The higher the frequency of people wearing masks in the 
displayed social group, the less strange participants felt about themselves. This effect of a 
descriptive social norm was particularly effective when people saw others wearing less 
intrusive masks, here, simple surgery masks.
Interpretation
The more people use masks, the less strange it feels for the people to wear masks and so 
the higher the acceptance for using them in a sustainable way. This assists to efficiently 
and effectively reduce the risk of infecting others.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35848343
Funding. None
Keywords: COVID-19, virus, face masks, acceptance, psychology, pandemic
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35848344
Introduction
With more than 2.5 million cases of COVID-19 (Coronavirus disease 2019) worldwide (effective 
24 April 2020), most of the epidemics in West European states appear to be stable; in some 
regions they are declining already1
. These “flattening curves” are promising as they are the basis 
for keeping the rate of new infections at a level that can be handled by the given hospital 
infrastructures. Psychologically, this promising development is dangerous, because it can make 
people believe that the pandemic is under control, which could in turn end up in a premature 
liberalization of containment measures. 
The WHO Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for Infectious Hazards (STAG-IH) 
regularly reviews and adjusts the assessment of risks and needed measures to mitigate the 
infection of SARS-CoV-2 (Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) causing COVID19. One of the pragmatic ways to reduce the chance of transmitting respiratory viruses in general 
is to use face masks1 2
, which has recently been recommended for the specific situation of 
COVID-19 as well 3
.
Besides providing a physical barrier to the virus, face masks can have further functions: 
They can, for instance, cue adequate behavior in a social situation, they may trigger additional, 
positive hygiene practices 4
, and they can reduce fears and thus facilitate active partaking in 
social life, especially for very vulnerable persons or people with intolerance of uncertainty 5
.
Wearing masks is not a sufficient 6 but a necessary facet of the full spectrum of 
interventions set up to delay a major surge of the pandemic and to level the demand for hospital 
 
1 The term “mask” will be used within this paper to refer to typical face masks used by non-professionals, including 
improvised masks, e.g. loop scarfs, dust and surgical masks – such protective items are now frequently called 
community masks.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35848345
beds, while protecting those persons who are most vulnerable to a severe progress of COVID-19 
(elderly people, people with respiratory problems and other comorbidities)
7
.
Although the multifaceted benefits of face masks are sufficiently known, people in many 
areas of the world are not used to wearing them. Consequently, the frequency and acceptance of 
wearing masks is still low in Europe, which stands in stark contrast to the high usage rates in 
various Asian communities, see 8,9. One major reason for not wearing a face mask in the West is 
the feeling that one may look strange or be judged as being strange by others. Feeling strange (or 
normal, on the other hand), is closely linked to descriptive social norms that are present in a 
given Umwelt, the social environment. This implies that the mere frequency of mask wearers in 
society might be an essential factor to move individuals to wear face masks as well. This is a 
paradigmatic example for the importance of understanding the psychology of pandemics
5
. A
psychological perspective allows assessing why people do or do not do certain things, which is 
the prerequisite for finding ways to change behavior. In case of mask wearing, the question is: 
How can we change the attitude towards and the feelings about wearing masks? The 
psychological answer, in terms of a hypothesis is: Via the social norm, as one possibility 10,11
. 
The present study tested this account by confronting participants with pictures that show social 
groups with varying frequencies of persons who wear different kinds of face masks. We assessed 
whether the different social norms, that were thus implicitly communicated, affected the 
participants’ feeling about wearing a face mask themselves. 
Methods
Participants. The needed sample size of N = 90 was calculated a priori via power analysis 12
targeting a one-tailed matched paired t-test which is able to detect a small-to-medium effect size 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35848346
of dz = 0.3 13
, given an α = 0.05 and a test power (1-β) = 0.80. As we aimed to understand the 
acceptance of wearing masks in one country specifically (Germany), we had to exclude data sets 
from people originating from different countries yielding a final number of complete data sets of 
N = 86 (Mage = 28.9 years [15-87 years], Nfemale = 61) which reduced the achieved post hoc test 
power to 0.79. 
Material. Based on frontal photos of 12 Caucasian faces (6 female, 6 male) taken from the Color 
Feret database 14,15 we crafted different versions of displays of these faces. The base version 
showed all faces without masks at random places of the display making up a social group. For 
the further displays we employed different masks which we photographed correctly positioned 
on an artificial head model: 1) a typical homemade (beige) community mask—in the following 
called “simple mask”, 2) an FFP2 mask (N95; white), and 3) a black loop scarf (see Figure 1), 
We cut out the images of the masks via Photoshop to be able to apply them to the different faces 
of the social group.
Figure 1: One of the employed faces with different mask conditions: A) none, B) simple, C) FFP2, and D) loop scarf.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35848347
For each mask, we generated five different configurations, always consisting of the 12 faces: 1) 
only one female wearing a mask, 2) only one male wearing a mask, 3) one female and one male 
wearing masks, 4) three females and three males wearing masks and 5) all persons wearing 
masks. This yielded 1 [base] + 3 [mask type] × 5 [configurations] = 16 versions. The stimulus 
material can be retrieved from the https://osf.io/gu6xr/. 
Figure 2: Exemplary display presented, here with six (3 female, 3 male) people wearing simple masks.
Procedure. The experiment realized via SoSciSurvey online engine was conducted between 20 
April (15:47 local time) and 23 April (16:56 local time). This was before any general legal 
obligations to wear masks in Germany were in action. Prior to the experimental session, written 
informed consent was obtained from each participant. All data were collected anonymously. The 
participants were exposed to all display versions, one by another, with order of the displays 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35848348
being randomized across participants. Participants were asked to imagine the social situation 
they were in when confronted with a group of displayed persons (“You are wearing a mouthnose mask on yourself and are now facing those persons. How do you feel in such a situation?”). 
While observing the scene without time pressure (Mresponse time=20.0 s), they were asked to answer 
two consecutive questions on a 7-point scale (1= not strange at all, 7= very strange): A) Feel 
myself: “While wearing MY mask I am feeling ...”, B) Feel others: “The others appear ...”
[capital lettered MY was also used in the experimental version]. There was no time limit for 
giving a response. This should allow a full unfolding of the participants’ imagery for the social 
scenes signalled by the watched displays. The general study design (psychophysical testing) was 
given ethical approval by the local ethics committee of the University of Bamberg. The entire 
procedure lasted approximately 5-10 minutes.
Results
Data were submitted to further data processing executed by R 3.6.3 16, with linear mixed models 
being analyzed via toolbox lmer
17
. The entire, anonymized, data set is available at the Open 
Science Framework https://osf.io/gu6xr/.
As we were mainly interested in the impact of the number of persons in the Umwelt 
(social environment) wearing masks on the feeling of wearing masks (and because we did not 
find significant differences between ratings for single male and female mask wearers, p > .6164, 
n.s.), we pooled data for both conditions where only one single mask wearer showed up. As 
shown in Figure 3, we uncovered a clear decrease of feeling strange about one’s own wearing a 
mask with increasing numbers of masks worn by the displayed persons. Meanwhile, the 
participants evaluated the appearance of the persons shown in the social scene as being more and 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=35848349
more stranger as the number of mask wearers increased. Both effects were found significant 
when tested with linear mixed models against a base model without taking number of mask 
wearers into account (p’s<.0001). The size of the Feel myself effect was large-to-very large 
(ηp(Feel myself)=.367) whereas the Feel others effect was qualified as small (ηp(Feel others)=.066). 
Figure 3: Mean evaluations of strangeness for different displays. Top row: evaluations of others appearing strange, bottom row: 
evaluations of participants feeling strange about themselves while watching the displays. Error bars indicate confidence intervals 
CI-95% based on adjusted values for taking within-subjects variances into account 18
.
Most importantly, we could show that the drop of feeling strange about oneself wearing a mask 
was particularly strong when directly comparing the all mask wearers scenario against the no 
mask wearers scenario (very large effect: Cohen’s d = -1.562, p<.0001). The effectiveness of 
reducing the strange feeling about wearing a mask was comparable across the three presented 
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=358483410
mask types, but was particularly pronounced for the simple mask (simple: Cohen’s d = -1.835, 
FFP2: Cohen’s d = -1.529, loop: Cohen’s d = -1.351).
Discussion
Wearing face masks in times of COVID-19 is one of the essential puzzle stones for effectively to
decrease the rate of new infections and to mitigate the negative consequences for individuals as 
well as society. Acceptance for wearing masks is still low in Europe—many people just feel 
strange when wearing masks and therefore, will not follow recommendations to put on masks in 
the public. Here we show how the mere exposure to people in the Umwelt (social environment) 
who do wear masks can dramatically change the feeling of strangeness when of wearing a mask 
oneself. This was particularly effective when people saw others wearing less intrusive masks, 
here simple self-made masks. First, they are easy and comfortable to use 19, they can be easily 
and privately produced with simple means, and they are cheap enough to equip many people 
around the globe by high quantities and fresh qualities. Second, as the suggestions of wearing 
masks for private persons is referring to the of protecting others and because there is no clear 
evidence of a difference in protecting others between simple masks and FFP2/N95 masks 3
, 
simple masks prevent shortage of professional medical masks that should be primarily reserved 
for medical workers. Third, in our study, they showed the highest acceptance rate in terms of 
feeling least odd when imaging to wear such a mask; this is an important pre-condition that face 
masks will actually be worn in different situations and over a longer span of time see 8,20
. Our
results will also assist decision makers to predict future acceptance of wearing masks when 
generally more people apply to these new hygienic practices.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=358483411
Conflict of Interest Statements
No conflicts to be reported
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=358483412
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the Hesslinger family for equipping me with different types of face 
masks.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=358483413
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=358483




NEW PAPER



International Journal of
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Article
Gender Differences in the COVID-19 Pandemic Risk
Perception, Psychology, and Behaviors of Spanish
University Students
Stephanie Rodriguez-Besteiro 1
, José Francisco Tornero-Aguilera 1,2 , Jesús Fernández-Lucas 3,4
and Vicente Javier Clemente-Suárez 1,2,5,*


Citation: Rodriguez-Besteiro, S.;
Tornero-Aguilera, J.F.;
Fernández-Lucas, J.;
Clemente-Suárez, V.J. Gender
Differences in the COVID-19
Pandemic Risk Perception,
Psychology, and Behaviors of Spanish
University Students. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 3908.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph18083908
Academic Editors: Paolo Roma,
Merylin Monaro, Cristina Mazza and
Paul B. Tchounwou
Received: 2 March 2021
Accepted: 2 April 2021
Published: 8 April 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 Faculty of Sports Sciences, Universidad Europea de Madrid, Tajo Street, s/n, 28670 Madrid, Spain;
stephanie.rodriguez@universidadeuropea.es (S.R.-B.); josefrancisco.tornero@universidadeuropea.es (J.F.T.-A.)
2 Studies Centre in Applied Combat (CESCA), 45007 Toledo, Spain
3 Applied Biotechnology Group, European University of Madrid, c/ Tajo s/n, Villaviciosa de Odón,
28670 Madrid, Spain; jesus.fernandez2@universidadeuropea.es
4 Grupo de Investigación en Ciencias Naturales y Exactas, GICNEX, Universidad de la Costa, CUC,
080002 Barranquilla, Colombia
5 Grupo de Investigación en Cultura, Educación y Sociedad, Universidad de la Costa,
080002 Barranquilla, Colombia
* Correspondence: vctxente@yahoo.es
Abstract: The actual COVID-19 pandemic scenario has generated a context of uncertainty, helplessness, and inequality. Yet, the perception of COVID-19 risk has influenced nutritional, psychological,
and physical activity patterns depending on gender. We conducted the present research with the
aim of studying gender differences of university students in the perceived risk of the COVID-19 pandemic, and in psychological, nutritional, oral health, and physical activity habits. To reach the study’s
aim, 300 volunteer university students completed an online questionnaire which analyzed variables
of perceived risk of the COVID-19 pandemic, psychological profiles, and nutritional, oral health,
and physical activity habits. Results showed that females presented a higher perception of danger to
the COVID-19 virus than males but showed no differences in how the pandemic has affected personal
lives. Females showed higher values of anxiety, conscientiousness, neuroticism, and openness to experience, while males presented higher values of extraversion. Nutritionally, males presented greater
consumption of soft drinks, meat, and pasta or rice, and lower buccal hygiene. Yet, no differences
were found regarding physical activity patterns. Results from the present study could be used by
various educational institutions to implement multidisciplinary interventions to reduce the stress
and risk perception.
Keywords: gender differences; COVID-19; students; risk perception; anxiety; personality
1. Introduction
Originating in Wuhan (Hubei, China) in December 2019 as a cluster of unexplained
cases of pneumonia, the World Health Organization classified the SARS-Cov-2 outbreak
as a pandemic in March 2020, affecting multiple countries, with more than 110 million
confirmed cases and more than 2.5 million deaths [1]. On 26 February 2020, the first case
of COVID-19 was detected in Spain. Due to the large increase in the number of cases,
on 14 March, the Spanish government declared a state of alarm throughout the country.
Beyond impacting millions of lives around the world, the pandemic has dealt a blow to the
economy on a global level. The COVID-19 health crisis has posed a complex scenario for
economy not only because of the shock it has produced, but also because its repercussions
will be significant [2]. The world economy is facing its greatest challenge since the Great
Recession. The state of alarm in Spain has resulted in the confinement of millions of
people and, for this reason, the Spanish economy was forced to establish urgent measures
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 3908. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18083908 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerphInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 3908 2 of 9
to avoid the paralysis of both public and private administrative activity. In this way,
many companies were forced to implement teleworking quickly so that their employees
could continue to carry out their duties from home. Similarly, universities also moved
75% of their students [3] to online learning so that they could continue their studies [4].
However, not all companies have been able to adapt to this new modality, so they have
been forced to permanently or temporarily suspend all or part of their activity, exercising
Temporary Employment Regulation Files or on many occasions to dismiss their employees.
Because of the interactions between biological factors and social determinants, including gender stereotypes, differences and roles, social stigma, and social autonomy [5],
inequities are expected to appear in the context of COVID-19. Indeed, COVID-19 has
affected males and females differently, presenting higher fatality rates, a worse prognosis,
and a higher risk of death in males [6]. Yet, despite fatality rates, females have a higher
prevalence and severity of anxiety, depression, and acute stress symptoms [7]. However,
females have experienced a greater number of psychological alterations that can be associated with isolated symptoms and complex disorders, which are related to a deterioration
in functionality and the development of anxiety, insomnia, depression, or post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). In addition, gender moderates the relationship between emotional
disturbances (e.g., psychological distress) and personal strengths such as resilience and
social support in students. Thus, differences in psychometric and emotional profiles are
key elements to understand the striking differences between males and females regarding
COVID-19 beliefs and behaviors.
In this line, the authors hypothesize that females are more likely to take the pandemic
seriously. In March, 59% of female respondents considered COVID-19 to be a very serious
health problem compared to 49% of males. In mid-April, both numbers decreased, but the
gender difference remained: 40% of females still saw the virus as a very serious risk
compared to 33% of males. This difference is present among studied countries [8]. Indeed,
the authors postulate that gender differences regarding perception risk are echoed in
behavioral differences between male and female leaders. Countries which are led by
females have responded with greater effectiveness to the pandemic than countries led by
males [9]. For example, Germany, Iceland, New Zealand, and Denmark, which have female
leaders, have used a more democratic and inclusive style of leadership, with decisive and
clear communication strategies. Meanwhile, countries with male leaders such as the US,
Brazil, and the UK have experienced the worst COVID-19 outcomes [9].
Yet, one of the most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic groups are students, since their
welfare and mental health is threatened. Previous research on COVID-19’s psychological
effect on university students indicates that the economic situation, as well as delays in academic activities, are risk factors for developing anxiety, with depressive symptoms, stress,
and anxiety being the most commonly identified psychological effects [10]. When compared
to other collectives, such as professors, students seem to present higher scores of stress and
anxiety [11], with females presenting higher ratios and a growing and greater prevalence of
depression among male students [12]. However, the psychological and emotional profiles
and the behavioral responses depend greatly on both contextual and multifactorial factors
such as nutritional status, oral health, and the amount of physical exercise [13]. All of
these factors are influenced by gender [14], and previous authors have remarked that these
factors may be influenced by the pandemic situation (-) and lockdown (-).
In this line, researchers have established an association between the way people eat
and their mood. Thus, eating patterns can affect the way people feel [15]. During the
period of confinement, nutritional habits changed dramatically in parallel with the increase
in anxiety and stress values among the population [16]. Previous authors have found that
the most frequent changes related to an increased consumption of fruit (27%), eggs (25.4%),
legumes (22.5%), vegetables (21%), and fish (20%), and a reduced consumption of processed meats (35.5%) and sugary drinks (32.8%), with clear differences according to age and
gender. Physical activity can be a contextual factor for the psychological profile. Students
who are physically active tend to have a healthier and more balanced diet than thoseInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 3908 3 of 9
who are not physically active. University students practice an average 40 min of physical
activity per day, being significantly higher in males than in females [17]. Along these lines,
male university students tend to opt for sporting activities in their leisure time, while females give greater importance to other social activities and personal hobbies in detriment
of physical activity [18]. Few studies have focused on gender differences regarding the
impact of the COVID-19 outbreak countries like Spain, where mortality remains one of the
highest worldwide, especially when considering a wide range of multifactorial variables.
Thus, we conducted the present research with the aim of studying gender differences in
university student regarding the perceived risk of the COVID-19 pandemic and in psychological, nutritional, oral health, and physical activity habits. The initial hypotheses
were: (i) There are gender differences in the perceived risk of the COVID-19 pandemic, and
(ii) there are gender differences in the psychological, nutritional, oral health, and physical
activity habits of students.
2. Materials and Methods
In the current study, 300 university students residing in Spain, aged between 17 and
51 years (according to the sample obtained), were interviewed via online questionnaire in
a period of 3 months, from October 2020 to December 2020. Our inclusion criteria were:
Enrollment in the current academic year, currently living in Spain, and either graduate
or undergraduate students from any field/area of expertise. In order to prevent double
responses from the same person, students had to include their Student ID, which was
required to match with the university database. Furthermore, data were considered strictly
confidential. This research complied with the Helsinki declarations (revised in Brazil, 2013),
on human research and was approved by the University Ethics Committee (CIPI/18/074).
All of the participants digitally signed a consented participation where the aims and
procedure of the study was explained. To reach the aim of the present research, a crosssectional study was developed. The following parameters were analyzed.
2.1. Sociodemographic Factors
Age (years), height (cm), weight (kg), and Body Mass Index (BMI, Kg/m2
) were
analyzed, along with the degree of compliance with the confinement due to the COVID-19
crisis using a Likert scale, where 0 means the least and 10 the most. The question, “How
many people you have lived with during the confinement?” was measured on a selfperception scale, indicating the number of people with which the student lived.
2.2. Economic Variables
We analyzed whether the university students performed any type of paid work. If so,
we then asked whether this had been affected by the COVID-19 crisis. The options were:
Not affected, reduced working hours and income reduced, and job loss.
2.3. Psychological Profile
We analyzed the students’ perceived danger of the COVID-19 virus using a Likert
scale from 0 to 10, where 0 means the least and 10 is the most. A Likert scale was also
used to measure how the COVID-19 crisis has affected the participant personally, where
0 means the least and 10 the most. A reduced version of the Spanish version of the Big Five
Inventory [19] was used to measure personality traits, including openness to experience,
conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. The reduced version is
composed of 10 items that are answered on a 5-point Likert scale, where 1 means completely
disagree and 5 means completely agree. A reduced version of the Spanish version of
Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory [20], composed of 6 items assessing anxiety
that are answered on a 4-point Likert scale where 1 means not at all and 4 means very
much, was used to measure anxiety. The Spanish version of the Acceptance and Action
Questionnaire II [21] was used to analyze the experiential avoidance or psychological
inflexibility through 7 items answered by a 7-point Likert scale, where 0 means never trueInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 3908 4 of 9
and 7 means always true. The Spanish version of the UCLA Loneliness Scale [22] was
used to scale measures loneliness. In the present study, we used a condensed version
which consists of 3 items answered by a 3-point Likert scale, where 1 means never and
3 means frequently. The Spanish version of Zung Depression Scale [23] was used to
measure depression in relation to the COVID-19 crisis. The Zung Depression Scale uses a
self-applied scale for depression, which has a sensitivity and specificity greater than 80%
and consists of 20 items formulated in positive and negative terms. Somatic and cognitive
symptoms are highly relevant, with 8 items for each group. The scale also includes 2 items
referring to mood and 2 to psychomotor symptoms.
2.4. Health-Related Factors
Hours of sleep per day were measured on a self-perception scale, indicating the
number of hours the student sleep per day. The quality of the parcipants’ last sleep was
measured using a Likert scale, where 1 means very poor sleep quality and 10 means very
good sleep quality. Average number of steps per day in the last week was measured on
a self-perception scale, indicating the number of steps the student had taken in the last
week. Nutritional habits were analyzed using an adapted previously used questionnaire.
The first 2 questions were related to eating habits. The rest of questions to the consumption
frequency of different food groups, including fish, vegetables, legumes, meat, fast food,
soft drinks, in which answers ranged from “less than two per week” to “seven or more
per week.” For oral health, a previously used questionnaire consisting of 4 items related to
oral health was used. For the first question (“How many times a day do you brush your
teeth?”), the answers ranged from “none” to “more than four per day.” For the question
“Do you smoke?”, answers ranged from “no” to “more than five cigarettes per day.” The
rest of questions were answered by “yes,” “sometimes,” or “no.” Physical activity habits
were measured with a questionnaire used in line with previous research. We evaluated
the psychophysiological stress response in high psychologically demanding contexts using
a questionnaire which included the items: “Did you do any physical activity in the last
7 days?”, “If so, time in minutes of cyclic and/or aerobic activity (cycling, treadmill, Zumba)
adding up all the sessions of the 7 days”, “If so, time in minutes of activity with self-loads
(sit-ups, push-ups, squats...) or weights (gym machines, weights...) adding up all the
sessions of the 7 days.”
2.5. Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were analyzed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences
(SPSS) version 24.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Descriptive statistics (mean and standard
deviation) were calculated for each variable. Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests were performed
to analyze normality and homogeneity of each variable. To analyze gender differences
in sociodemographic, academic, and psychological variables, an independent T test was
conducted. To analyze gender differences in economic, health-related, and oral health
variables, the Chi-square test was used. The level of significance was set at p ≤ 0.05.
3. Results
Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation. Anthropometrical differences were
found regarding height, weight, and BMI (Table 1).Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 3908 5 of 9
Table 1. Gender differences in sociodemographic factors.
Variable Male Female t p
Age (yrs) 23.86 ± 5.45 24.40 ± 6.95 0.711 0.477
Height (cm) 178.17 ± 6.46 162.45 ± 17.10 −10.158 0.000
Weight (Kg) 79.98 ± 55.29 59.33 ± 8.44 −4.082 0.000
Body Mass Index (BMI) 23.65 ± 2.93 21.92 ± 2.87 −4.787 0.000
Degree of confinement compliance
due to the COVID-19 crisis 8.65 ± 1.69 8.91 ± 1.68 1.218 0.224
How many people have you lived
with in confinement? 2.74 ± 1.24 2.57 ± 1.19 −1.141 0.255
Regarding economic variables, no gender differences were found in how the COVID19 pandemic has affected employment (Table 2).
Table 2. Gender differences in economic variables.
Variable Male Female Chi-Squared p
Do you perform any paid work? 1.46 ± 0.65 1.54 ± 0.71 0.469 0.333
Regarding your work. have you been
affected by the COVID-19 crisis? 1.46 ± 0.65 1.59 ± 0.67 0.272 0.177
According to the academic variables, no gender differences were found in how the
COVID-19 pandemic has affected studies.
According to the psychological profile, females showed a higher perception of danger
to the COVID-19 virus than males. Females presented higher values in conscientiousness,
neuroticism, openness to experience, and stress than males. However, males presented
higher values of extraversion than females. Yet, no gender differences were seen for psychological traits such as depression, loneliness, and experiential avoidance (Table 3). Reliability
was estimated through Cronbach’s alpha, obtaining 0.729 for Big Five factors, 0.810 for
the Acceptance and Action Questionnaire II (AAQII), 0.870 for the UCLA Loneliness Scale
(UCLA), 0.854 for the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI), and 0.793 for the
Zung Depression Scale (ZUNG).
Table 3. Gender differences in psychological profiles.
Variable Male Female t p
Level of perceived danger in the
COVID-19 Pandemic 6.49 ± 2.03 7.20 ± 1.65 3.089 0.002
Extraversion 5.88 ± 1.71 5.27 ± 1.69 −2.906 0.004
Agreeableness 6.24 ± 1.55 6.56 ± 1.577 1.673 0.096
Conscientiousness 6.39 ± 1.89 7.08 ± 1.69 3.132 0.002
Neuroticism 5.74 ± 2.12 6.72 ± 2.27 3.609 0.000
Openness to experience 6.96 ± 1.69 7.48 ± 1.76 2.471 0.014
AAQII 23.36 ± 8.90 24.22 ± 11.04 0.702 0.483
UCLA 4.47 ± 1.76 4.47 ± 1.61 −0.033 0.974
ZUNG 41.73 ± 4.47 42.70 ± 5.23 31.945 0.234
AAQII (Acceptance and Action Questionnaire II); UCLA (UCLA Loneliness Scale); STAI (Spielberger State-Trait
Anxiety Inventory); ZUNG (Zung Depression Scale).
Regarding the health-related factors, males presented a higher weekly consumption
of soft drinks, meat, and pasta or rice than females. Females showed higher values in
daily tooth brushing and dry mouth than males. No gender differences were found in the
physical activity habits analyzed (Table 4).Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 3908 6 of 9
Table 4. Gender differences in the health-related factors.
Variable Male Female Chi-Squared p
How many meals did you take on average during
your confinement? 4.28 ± 1.25 4.50 ± 1.39 13.168 0.155
How many glasses of water do you drink per day? 4.89 ± 1.34 4.80 ± 1.43 5.262 0.385
Juices 1.63 ± 0.97 1.52 ± 0.90 2.458 0.483
Alcoholic Beverage 1.06 ± 0.27 1.04 ± 0.23 1.153 0.562
Fermented beverage 1.37 ± 0.70 1.30 ± 0.60 1.707 0.635
Soft drinks 1.58 ± 0.87 1.38 ± 0.69 4.118 0.042
Energy Drink 1.16 ± 0.44 1.12 ± 0.43 3.730 0.155
Fruit 2.68 ± 1.06 2.83 ± 1.01 3.230 0.357
Bakery/Sweets 1.72 ± 0.83 1.76 ± 0.89 2.931 0.402
Meat 2.87 ± 0.75 2.28 ± 0.95 34.075 0.000
Fish 2.00 ± 0.79 1.87 ± 0.81 6.846 0.077
Legume 2.21 ± 0.82 2.00 ± 0.84 11.721 0.008
Pasta or rice 2.69 ± 0.80 2.16 ± 0.89 26.040 0.000
Vegetables 2.55 ± 0.95 2.75 ± 0.98 3.826 0.281
Bread 2.70 ± 1.14 2.61 ± 1.18 1.669 0.644
Fast food 1.37 ± 0.63 1.28 ± 0.53 2.596 0.458
Do you smoke? 1.18 ± 0.60 1.29 ± 0.79 6.369 0.095
Do you suffer from gastritis or heartburn? 2.17 ± 0.49 2.20 ± 0.48 0.617 0.735
How many times do you brush your teeth per day? 2.39 ± 0.87 2.71 ± 0.80 3.078 0.002
Does your mouth often feel dry as if it lacks saliva? 2.11 ± 0.53 2.25 ± 0.59 2.057 0.041
Minutes of cyclic and/or aerobic activity 276.97 ± 243.24 227.77 ± 239.74 45.267 0.227
Minutes of activity with self-loading or weights 217.68 ± 209.87 236.36 ± 254.01 35.254 0.760
4. Discussion
The aim of the present research was to study gender differences among university
students regarding the perceived risk of the COVID-19 pandemic and in psychological,
nutritional, oral health, and physical activity habits. The initial hypothesis was partially
confirmed, since female students showed higher scores on the level of perceived risk of
the COVID-19 pandemic than male students. However, significant differences between
genders were found in some psychological and nutritional variables but not in oral health
and physical activity variables.
In the present study, females presented higher perceived risks level of the COVID-19
pandemic than males. Authors have suggested that there a is a gender difference in the
psychological experience, somatization, and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the
emotions it provokes, suggesting that women are more emotionally vulnerable to the effects
of COVID-19 context than men [24]. This may be related to the greater levels of state-trait
anxiety reached in this study, where females presented higher levels than males in lin
with previous literature [25]. This may also explain the greater emotional vulnerability of
females [26]. Indeed, there are also gender differences in stress coping among university
students [27], where females have shown greater stress and lower stress coping abilities
than male [28], thus supporting our results.
The psychometric profile and personality trait differences between genders may
explain the stronger influence of perceived risk and anxiety in females. Within these
personality traits, our data suggest that male students have higher levels of extraversion
than females, while females present higher values in conscientiousness and neuroticism,
which is in lineprevious research conducted in female professors [29]. The present data
suggest that females have greater openness to experience, contrary to the results of Castañeiras et al. (2006), where males showed higher levels of openness to experience than
females [30]. However, these differences could be attributed to the difference in the sociocultural context (Latin America-Europe), as well as the context of the sample, since our
sample was students.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 3908 7 of 9
Regarding the nutritional profile, no gender differences were found among the consumption of fruit, legume, or vegetables, which is contrary to previous studies. Authors
have suggested that male’s poorer nutrition knowledge explains a significant part of their
lower intake of fruit and vegetables [31], with a tendency for fat and protein rich foods
breweries as beer, spirits, and sweet carbonated drinks [32], in line with our data. Yet, it has
been reported that students have poor nutrition habits [33], reflecting a significant gender
difference in weight status with the percentage of overweight/obese males being more
than double that of females [34]. However, no gender differences were seen in the present
study as in previous research in the COVID-19 pandemic [35].
According to oral health profile, females showed significantly higher values for daily
tooth brushing, dry mouth, and gastritis than males. This high frequency in daily tooth
brushing is consequent with previous research and may be related to the higher values
of neuroticism and conscientiousness shown by females [36]. However, no significant
relationships have been found between toothbrushing and psychological factors [37]. In the
same way, dry mouth or lack of saliva has also been related to increased stress perception
and the somatization of anxiety and depression, conforming to a psych emotional profile
and stress perception of the analyzed female sample. Thus, a relationship was found
between stress and oral health, where females tended to suffer more than males despite the
high frequency of brushing, which coincides with the literature found in other groups such
as teachers [38].
Regarding the physical activity profile, no gender differences were found, which is
in line with previous literature among university students [39]. Yet, values or physical
exercise were still down considering the minimum requirements of daily/weekly physical
exercise, which is in line with data found in gender and university students in previous
research [40,41]. Indeed, authors have suggested that students who do not engage in
physical exercise or sport present greater stress reactions [42]. Yet, authors have suggested
that younger students present better performance in physical exercise, academics, and work,
demonstrating a good lifestyle compared to older students [43].
The multifactorial analysis of factors related to the perception of risk level of COVID19 may be a useful tool to measure the associated stress in university students to explain
and prevent the psychological consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition,
the use of questionnaires allows significant information to be collected in a short period
of time. Knowledge of these related factors could be used by various educational institutions to implement multidisciplinary interventions to reduce this perception and, thus,
students’ stress in the face of the virus. The present research also presents some limitations,
with the main limitation being the lack of biological measurement due to COVID-19 and
the impossibility of measuring stress hormones (cortisol, adrenaline, alpha amylase . . . ).
Other limitations were that anthropometrical data were self-declared, which may lead to
a serious risk of bias. However, since this was an online questionnaire, no other further
methods of evaluations were possible. Future studies may address this issue. As a future
research line, we propose analyzing the influence of cultural differences in the levels of
perceived danger from the COVID-19 virus. In addition, this study could be extended to
other degrees, as well as to other educational levels such as primary and secondary school.
5. Conclusions
We can conclude that female university students presented higher levels of perceived
danger from the COVID-19 virus than male university students. Males showed higher
levels of extraversion than females, but females showed higher levels of conscientiousness,
neuroticism, and openness to experience. Females showed higher levels of perceived
anxiety than males. Regarding the nutritional profile, males showed a higher frequency of
consumption of soft drinks, meat, pasta, or rice. Regarding oral health, females showed
a higher number of times they brushed their teeth, as well as a higher frequency of dry
mouth or lack of saliva. In the physical activity profile, no significant results were found in
either gender.Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 3908 8 of 9
The multifactorial analysis of factors related to the perception of the level of danger to
COVID-19 may be a useful tool to measure the associated stress in university students to
explain and prevent the psychological consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the use of questionnaires allows significant information to be collected in a short
period of time. Awareness of these related factors could be used by various educational
institutions to implement multidisciplinary interventions to reduce this perception and,
thus, students’ stress in response to the virus.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, V.J.C.-S. and J.F.T.-A.; methodology, J.F.-L.; software,
J.F.-L. and S.R.-B.; validation, S.R.-B., J.F.T.-A., J.F.-L., V.J.C.-S.; formal analysis, V.J.C.-S. and S.R.-B.;
investigation, V.J.C.-S., J.F.-L. and S.R.-B.; writing—S.R.-B., J.F.T.-A., J.F.-L., V.J.C.-S. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the European University Ethics Committee (CIPI/18/074).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: All data are presented in the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.




NEW PAPER



Letter to the Editor
Infection prevention partners up
with psychology in a Danish
Hospital successfully addressing
staffs fear during the COVID-19
pandemic
Sir,
In relation to a recent paper “Risk of nosocomial transmission of Coronavirus Disease 2019: an experience in a general
ward setting in Hong Kong” [1] we would like to share an
interesting experience from Denmark. Nordsjællands Hospital
(NOH) is a 600-bed hospital situated north of Copenhagen,
Denmark. The first Danish COVID-19 patient was diagnosed 27th
February 2020 (https://www.ssi.dk). A (first?) peak of the
Danish outbreak was reached around 1st April 2020 and is
presently, in late-April 2020, declining (https://politi.dk/
coronavirus-i-danmark/in-english). NOH follows national
infection control guidelines for COVID-19 from National Board
of Health (https://www.ssi.dk).
We have worked at NOH to prepare for the pandemic by
building COVID-19 cohort isolation wards using existing wards,
creating new workflows, tripling the available number of
intensive care beds, and initiating intensive education of literally all groups of staff. We pride ourselves on being used to a
high standard regarding hand hygiene [2], we are well familiar
with the occasional seasonal occurrence of influenza, norovirus, CDIFF and VRE [3]; however, COVID19 is a new virus and
reports of deaths among healthcare staff from Italy, China and
Spain make frightening reading, especially for front-line
healthcare personal.
Recently the mental health care for medical staff in China
during the COVID-19 outbreak including various remedial
actions was reported [4,5]. The frontline staff at NOH predominately expressed fear of not being sufficiently protected
from infection when using personal protection equipment
(PPE). This problem was hospital wide but particularly pronounced at the COVID cohort wards because the workflow was
new and unfamiliar and the exposure intense. Accordingly, a
new and unusual collaboration between an infection prevention and control nurse and a psychologist was initiated. An
inductive change strategy (bottom-up) addressing staff fear
and anxiety was used in an attempt to release defence mechanisms blocking rational thinking and change of behaviour. The
intervention was based on Edgar H. Schein’s Process
Consultation and how to help people change [6,7]. The psychologist acted as a process facilitator and the infection prevention and control nurse acted as a teacher during the
process. Facilitation was combined with psychoeducation in
coping strategies towards fear and high level of stress, and the
education focused primarily on recalling staff’s existing
knowledge of infection prevention and secondly on how to use
PPE correctly. Thus far, this new approach has been used in five
sessions comprising 20 nurses and 15 physicians. The response
from staff has been overwhelmingly positive. Most were
relieved that their worries were acknowledged and became
eager to discuss different scenarios of virus transmission. Many
were reassured of their professional ability to risk assess
behaviour when close to patients with COVID-19 and began
trusting their knowledge of infection prevention and correct
use of PPE.
Combining the professional angles of psychology and infection prevention proved fruitful. Addressing and acknowledging
fear of healthcare staff might lead to the reappearance of
rational thinking and of a professional attitude in the fearful
time of a pandemic.
Conflict of interest statement
None declared.
Funding sources
NONE.




NEW PAPER


The new normal of social psychology in the face of the COVID-19
pandemic: Insights and advice from leaders in the field
Kim-Pong Tam,1 Angela K.-y. Leung,2 and Sammyh Khan3
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, 2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
City, Singapore, and 3
Orebro University, € Orebro, Sweden €
The COVID-19 pandemic has hit the world hard. At the
time of this writing (20 January 2021), there have been
over 94 million confirmed cases globally, including over
2 million deaths (World Health Organization, 2021).
These numbers are still climbing; in the past week, over
580,000 new cases were recorded per day. The massive
worldwide impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has led
some world leaders to liken it to World War II. Whether
these historical comparisons hold true is debatable, but
they do speak to the scale of the challenges that humanity is currently struggling to overcome.
Revisiting the history of social psychology, one noticeable trend is that the agenda of social psychologists is
interwoven with events that happen in society and the
world (Ross et al., 2010). For example, the Holocaust during World War II stimulated social psychologists’ interest
in ethnocentrism, aggression, and obedience, just as
increasing globalization became one of the impetuses for
investigations into the role of culture in human behaviour,
and hence the emergence of cultural and cross-cultural
psychology. Considering its immensity, we believe that
the COVID-19 pandemic will likely be a trigger for profound and consequential changes in social psychology
(Khazaie & Khan, 2020). We thus organized this special
forum in order to initiate a discussion regarding the
potential impacts of the pandemic on our field.
In this forum, six leading social psychologists
(Dolores Albarracin, Michael Bond, Jolanda Jetten,
Yoshihisa Kashima, James Liu, and Sander van der
Linden) guide us in taking a step back and reflecting on
how social psychology scholarship is being and will be
influenced by the pandemic, and what social psychologists can and should do to serve humanity during this
crisis. They consider how human systems are being
transformed by the pandemic and anticipate what these
systems will look like in the post-pandemic world, and
thereby share their views on the new normal of social
psychological research, teaching, and practice. They also
offer some advice as to how social psychologists can
contribute their expertise and establish real-world
impacts; their advice is particularly useful for students
and early-career social psychologists.
Specifically, Albarracin and Jung (2021) lay out a
research agenda for the post-COVID-19 world. The agenda
highlights the need for social psychologists to identify contents for public health messages based on a systematic
assessment of theories and findings, to understand self-regulation of behaviour in social contexts, and to investigate
people’s understanding of health statistics, diffusion of
health information and behaviour within social networks,
the role of prosociality in the containment of the pandemic
and people’s adaptation to its impacts, as well as group and
intergroup dynamics triggered by the pandemic.
Bond (2021) proposes two major lines of inquiry for
social psychologists, particularly those in Asia. First,
considering the variations both within Asia and between
different parts of the world in terms of nation-level resilience against the pandemic, there is a need to explain
these variations and explore the role of culture in them.
Second, in understanding the general public’s responses
to the pandemic, it is useful to develop locally and
indigenously sensitive measures. This is because existing
measures originally developed in mainstream societies in
the scientific literature may not suffice to capture the
pertinent phenomena.
Liu (2021) echoes Bond’s call for attention to the role
of culture by presenting correlations between the epidemiological data (total cases per million and fatalities per million) and Schwartz (2004)’s cultural dimension scores.
With this observation as the point of departure, he elaborates how collectivism (or embeddedness) can potentially
serve as an effective cultural basis for the public’s adoption of safety measures and compliance with advice from
authorities, thereby possibly reducing infection and fatality rates. Liu (2021) further points out that globally oriented social psychologists should be very careful about
generalizing findings regarding collective behaviour from
research based on European and American populations to
other societies. Relatedly, they should refrain from holding any single culture as the gold standard for conjecturing
solutions to crises and social problems, and recognize that
the future of humanity will be multipolar.
Kashima (2021) exposes a limitation in conventional
social psychological theorizing: negligence regarding institutions. He critically points out that although social psychology is a research area that explicitly examines human
Correspondence: Kim-Pong Tam, Rm 2351, Division of Social
Science, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong. E-mail:
kevintam@ust.hk
© 2021 Asian Association of Social Psychology and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.
Asian Journal of Social Psychology (2021), 24, 8–9 DOI: 10.1111/ajsp.12468
bs_bs_bannerAsian Journal of Social Psychologybehaviour as embedded in society and social contexts,
institutions are very often left out of the inquiry and
relegated to other social sciences. Considering humanity’s
struggle against the pandemic, the role of institutions (including national, international, and nongovernmental ones)
in behaviour cannot be overstated. Obviously, containing a
crisis at the scale of the COVID-19 pandemic requires
timely strategies and responses from various institutions.
Thus, questions such as how people cooperate with institutions, how institutions are designed and formed, and how
the balance between institutions’ control and the public’s
freedom is negotiated in society are issues that social psychologists should not shy away from.
Jetten et al. (2021) take a positive note by discussing
several silver linings for social psychology emerging
from the pandemic. These positive shifts of our field
include a greater emphasis on context dependence in
human behaviour and the questioning of “timeless universals,” a stronger focus on processes happening at the
collective level, and a higher level of awareness of the
necessity of collaborative research efforts and the need
for engagement with policymakers and the general public to achieve greater real-world impact.
Concurring with Jetten et al.’s point regarding realworld impact, van der Linden (2021) offers several incisive recommendations based on a personal reflection of
his career, citing examples from some of his recent
works. Relating to the ramifications brought about by
the pandemic, he speaks of the importance of choosing
questions that people truly care about, reaching out to
audiences outside the social psychological circle, and
looking for collaborations with people from diverse
backgrounds who share a common vision.
To conclude, with this special forum we call for fellow
social psychologists to reflect on the potential impacts the
COVID-19 pandemic has on our field and consider how
we can move the discipline towards a more informed
understanding of this pandemic as well as many other global grand challenges humanity is facing.
Conflict of interest
The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.



NEW PAPER


Correspondence should be addressed to: roberto.fasanelli@unina.it 8.1
Papers on Social Representations
Volume 29, Issue 2, pages 8.1-8.36 (2020)
Peer Reviewed Online Journal
ISSN 1021-5573
© 2020 The Authors
[http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index]
Social Representations of Covid-19 in the Framework of 
Risk Psychology
ROBERTO FASANELLI1
, ALFONSO PISCITELLI2 and IDA GALLI1
1Department of Social Sciences – University of Naples “Federico II”
2Departement of Agricultural Sciences – University of Naples “Federico II”
Social representations theory offers a useful framework to analyse the construction 
of lay explanations of social risks. The current study used this theoretical framework 
to investigate lay explanations of the COVID-19 outbreak. Risk psychology 
generally focuses on individual perceptions and cognitive errors or the notion of the 
fallibility of human information processing. According to Moscovici, society is not a 
source of information, but of meanings. People, on topics of interest, construct 
questions and look for answers, rather than merely perceiving and processing 
obtained information. Social psychologists, therefore, cannot be interested in risk 
responses as erroneous or correct, nor as false, deficient, or biased. Instead, they 
must be concerned with how social awareness of risk is built, in other words, how 
and why people need to co-construct social representations of such a risk. To 
identify the structure and content of COVID-19 SRs, we used a non-probabilistic 
sample composed by social sciences and humanities and life sciences students (N = 
124). To access the structure of COVID-19 SRs, we employed the method of 
hierarchical evocation. The free association task was completed by participants’ 
justification of their association choices to avoid the lexical ambiguity that could 
come from this kind of data. To access the content of COVID-19 SRs, we utilized 
both open and closed questions made up starting from the following dimensions: 
informative sources and participants’ networks of interaction; anchoring and 
objectivation processes; expectations and emotions related to the object.Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.2
Keywords: social representations; COVID-19; risk psychology; mixed methods
This paper is inscribed in the strand of studies of the social psychology of risk, inspired by the 
social constructivist paradigm, and takes as its foundation the point of view of ordinary 
people about the probability that a risky event could cause damage to their own and others' 
health. The line of investigation adopted underlines the social and collective nature of people's 
knowledge of themselves and their world, focusing on shared conceptions, the way they 
develop, circulate and change (Jodelet, 2006). In this type of analysis, authors generally pay 
attention only to the ways of thinking, feeling and communicating of laypeople, which are not 
mistake-makers, i.e., they are not strategic users of schemes or heuristics that distort 
perception, nor to a subject capable of using only naive thought or unscientific thought. In the 
chosen psychosocial perspective, rather, the subject is seen as a user of a different logic, sui 
generis, which does not reference the abstract categories of true/false but which operates in a 
"natural", "consensual", or "other" than the scientific one, "reified".
This study aimed to explore the coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) social 
representations, which, from January 2020 to date, has overwhelmed Italy and the rest of the 
world. The outbreak forced populations, social, health and economic systems into a total 
lockdown, as never experienced before. 
The disciplinary field within which we performed the research described below is that 
of risk psychology/risk perception, traditionally focused on individual perceptions and 
cognitive errors, or centered on the notion of the fallibility of human information processing. 
In general, we can define risk as the likelihood of experiencing harm that involves both the 
nature of an option and the probability of its consequences (Ayres, França Júnior, Calazans & 
Saletti Filho, 2003). Psychology has been broadly involved with the analysis of the 
individual/social connection to risks, defining the development of so-called risk psychology 
(Breakwell, 2014). This field of psychology takes its origin from the principles of decision 
theory, based on theories of probability and mathematical calculations. In this framework, 
taking a risk depends on choosing between different options with the same probability of 
success or failure. The effort of the discipline is to understand psychological mechanisms at 
the base of the interaction between individuals and risks in the ambiguous and diffuse 
condition of uncertainty (Marván & López-Vázquez, 2018). Since its inception, risk 
psychology, has sought to identify the underlying dimensions that explain the organization of Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.3
the characteristics attributed to risk. The primary argument was that any hazard could be 
located in a two-dimensional matrix, one dimension reflecting the degree of fear and 
controllability of the hazard and the other reflecting the degree of uncertainty associated with 
the properties of the hazard. From this original trajectory, various patterns were developed. 
The models that describe how people judge uncertain events claim that when faced with 
uncertainty in results, intuitive inferences, predictions, evaluations and diagnoses of 
likelihood, people do not conform to the laws of probability theory. An approach focused on 
decision making in the absence of certainty about its implications plays an essential role in the 
understanding of economic behavior. Research in this area has shown that judgments tend to 
reveal consistent biases that some heuristics can partly predict (Kahneman, 2011). 
Experimental research data mostly characterized this set of models. Within this range of 
studies, the Optimistic Bias (OB) approach occupies a privileged position, central in several 
socio-cognitive models that aim at predicting risk-taking factors, such as the Health Belief 
Model (Rosenstock, 1974), the Protection Motivation Theory (Rogers, 1975) and the Health 
Action Process Approach (Schwartzer, 1992).
Further models describe how people characterize the attributes of hazards or explore 
how people estimate the extent of harm that a hazard can cause and the probability that such 
harm will occur. In this case, the estimation of the perceived risk determines the focus 
(Slovic, 2000). The third group of models aims to explain how one person may differ from 
another in the perception of specific risk and the response to that risk. These studies aimed to 
identify personal factors that can be influential in determining an individual's reaction to risk. 
Authors considered socio-demographic criteria as significant predictors. Great attention has 
been paid to the links between risk perception and personality using the "Big Five" factors 
proposed by Zuckerman (2005). The fourth group of models develops on the growing 
awareness that emotions or feelings play a significant role in explaining how people react to 
risks. Equally important is the conceptual framework used to describe how communication 
within complex networks of people and institutions serve to amplify or mitigate the risk 
associated with a hazard. This model is known as the Social Amplification of Risk 
Framework (SARF).
Moreover, interaction, also channeled by the mass media, has transformed novelty into 
something that can be understood and incorporated into something already known and 
interpreted. These processes of symbolic social interaction are complex and are the object of 
investigation in Social Representations Theory's research. Social Representations TheoryPapers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.4
researchers have frequently become interested in how new dangers and risks are understood 
by ordinary people, giving rise to the last of the clusters of approaches identified by Glynis 
Breackwell (2014) in her crucial book on risk psychology.
The importance of the Social Representations Theory approach to the study of risks 
lies in Moscovici's (1989) conviction that society cannot be simplistically reduced to a source 
of information but must be considered as a source of meaning. On issues of their interest, 
people construct questions and search for answers, rather than merely perceiving and 
processing information derived from the social context (Moscovici, 1984). Social psychology, 
therefore, cannot concern itself with how much a response to a risk is wrong or correct, 
whether it is true or false, but must deal with how ordinary people construct social knowledge 
of risk, in other words, how they represent it (Fasanelli & Galli, 2009). As underlined by 
Smith, O'Connor, and Joffe (2015, p. 1.3), "Risks, or the potential dangers that sit on the 
horizon of people's awareness, need to be assimilated, taken in, by the individuals and 
communities confronted with them".
The Social Representations Theory may be uniquely appropriate in explaining why 
particular perceptions or reasoning patterns of risks emerge. Ordinary people commonly 
develop these forms of knowledge to explain what occurs when they are obliged to make 
sense, or give meaning, to ideas or data that are unusual to them, under conditions of 
uncertainty or social dispute. These are attributes that delineate the initial interface between 
people and information about risks. Indeed, according to Breakwell (2014, p. 284) “it may be 
argued that encountering a newly identified hazard inevitably triggers social representations 
processes”.
Starting from these considerations and adopting the theoretical perspective of social 
representations, we investigated to verify the existence of differences between the social 
representations of COVID-19 elaborated by university students belonging both to the area of 
social sciences and humanities and to that of life sciences.
METHODOLOGY
According to Abric (2003), all representations, being organized sets, have two components, a 
content and a structure. To study a social representation in this perspective, means, first of all, 
to trace the constituent elements of this structure. Knowledge of the content alone is not 
enough; it is the organization of this content that gives meaning to the whole representation. 
Two identical contents can correspond to two different symbolic universes and, consequently, Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.5
subtend two distinct social representations (Fasanelli, Galli, Riverso & Piscitelli, 2020; Galli 
& Fasanelli, 1995, 2000, 2020; Galli, Liguori, Lorenzi-Cioldi & Fasanelli, 2019; Tuselli, 
Schember, Fasanelli & Galli, 2015). For this reason, we hypothesized the existence of two 
different representations of COVID-19 in two distinct groups of participants composed of 
university students at the University of Naples "Federico II". Specifically, the first group 
included students from the department of social sciences and the department of humanities (n 
= 63; mean age = 22.9; Mdn = 23.0; Mo = 19.0; SD = 3.7). The second group consist of 
students attending various departments: molecular medicine and medical biotechnologies; 
public health; clinical medicine and surgery (n = 61; average age = 22.5; Mdn = 23.00; Mo = 
24.00; SD = 2.73). 
The choice of this sampling strategy of opposing students from different scientific 
areas was based on the assumption that, as a result of their academic membership, different 
groups may exhibit different degrees of proximity to the object, COVID-19. Different 
technical choices in enrollment in courses in the University of Naples also means different 
social and environmental contexts of academic life. These students are physically distant. 
Social sciences and humanities occupy several ancient buildings in the historic center, while 
the life sciences are located within modern facilities situated inside a circumscribed and 
fenced-in area (the polyclinic park) located on the northern outskirts of the city. Miguel, 
Valentim, and Carugati (2012) showed how the closeness to the object modulates the content 
of representations. People who have some scientific/technical knowledge about an object 
probably feel more involved with it and change more practices related to it. Knowledge is a 
complex variable because it continuously evolves in parallel with the time passing. For 
example, each subject can modify or change his/her own level of knowledge about COVID19 by learning information about contagion processes or illness characteristics, by changing 
or evolving his/her lifestyle and by adapting his/her habits to his/her social relations or new 
life conditions (Dany, Apostolidis & Harabi, 2014). Mouret, Lo Monaco, Urdapilleta, and 
Parr (2013) emphasized that the degree of knowledge of a given object influences the level of
competence about the object itself and, on the contrary, it influences the distance from the 
object. Conceptualized by Abric (2001) and then tested in an interesting study (Dany & Abric, 
2007), that notion is constituted by 3 components (Dany et al., 2014): knowledge (more or 
less adequate identification of the social object); involvement (the degrees of concern, 
through social participation, toward the social object); and level of practice (behavior 
regarding the social object). For this exploratory study, we decided that it was sufficient to Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.6
use scientific areas, social sciences and humanities/life sciences as a simple dichotomous 
proxy variable for the distance from the object. Both groups of participants were convenience 
samples. Students were reached during online university classes and asked to fill out an online 
form at the end of the lesson. We collected data from the 20th to the 30th of May 2020. 
Participants provided their informed consent verbally, following The European Code of 
Conduct for Research Integrity (ALLEA, 2017).
Data Collection Strategies
Within the methodological scenario characterized by the dualism quality-quantity, positions 
bearing different ontological, epistemological, and methodological assumptions, the 
pragmatist approach is a path that rejects the paradigmatic dichotomy and advocates the 
efficient and integrated use of both approaches. A sort of third paradigm, not yet able to solve 
all the metaphysical, epistemological and methodological issues, identifies a contingent 
approach based on the needs that guide "concepts and methods of research and not vice versa; 
an approach that unfolds in a methodological pluralism made of actions, needs, and research 
procedures appropriate to the reality studied". (Amaturo & Punziano, 2016, p. 67). 
Considering Social Representations Theory methodologically pluralistic by definition, we 
chose a mixed-methods approach to identify the structure and the content of COVID-19's 
social representations, using the structural approach (Abric, 1994, Flament, 1994; Vergès, 
1994, 1995). To reach the structuring elements of the social representation of COVID-19 and 
to reconstruct their organization, we chose the method of hierarchical evocation (Abric, 2003; 
Vergès & Bastounis, 2001). In particular, we asked participants to answer a free association 
and hierarchical task, which has the double advantage of joining the frequency dimension of 
the terms and the importance given to them by the subjects. The intersection between these 
two criteria makes possible the identification of constituent, or significant elements. We 
completed the association/hierarchization task with open-ended questions about the 
respondent's justification linked to each of the associated terms. The aim was to avoid lexical 
ambiguity, misuse, et similia, typical of this kind of data (Galli, Fasanelli & Schember, 2017, 
2018; Schember, Tuselli, Fasanelli & Galli, 2015). In the second part of the questionnaire, we 
asked participants to answer to both semi-structured and structured questions made up of the 
following dimensions: informative sources and participants interaction networks; anchoring 
and objectivation processes; expectations and emotions related to the object. According to 
Van Bavel, Baicker, Boggio, Capraro, Cichocka, Cikara et al. (2020, p. 461), "Emotions often Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.7
drive risk perceptions, sometimes more so than factual information. An emotional response to 
a risky situation can influence thinking". Beyond the medical risk, the pandemic has had 
enormous psychological and social impacts. Various lines of research had previously focused 
on understanding how societies define the origin and impact of epidemics and how they deal 
with them, with emotional coping as a key to the process (Idoiaga Mondragon, Gil de Montes 
& Valencia, 2017a; Ozamiz-Etxebarria, Dosil-Santamaria, Picaza-Gorrochategui & IdoiagaMondragon, 2020). For these reasons, we chose to ask interviewees about which emotions 
they feel thinking about COVID-19 using the Italian version of the Medical Emotion Scale 
(Duffy, Lajoie, Pekrun & Lachapelle, 2018; Amato, Fasanelli & Riverso, 2019).
Data Analysis Strategies
We treated the terms evoked by the participants first with lexical and categorical analysis. In 
the lexical phase, were aggregated all lemmas based on the synonymy criterion to obtain 
clusters of terms substantially coincidental with the manifest meaning (Bardin, 2003). 
Therefore, using a semantic criterion, terms were further aggregated starting from their 
justifications. Each of the obtained clusters was associated with a new label. We identified 
every label using, as a selection criterion, the great semantic proximity and frequency of 
occurrence of every term aggregated inside of it. Three independent judges completed the 
entire analytical process. Each judge worked first individually; then, afterwards, all of them 
discussed their analysis and agreed on a shared position. We chose an inclusion threshold for 
the obtained categories, which allowed us to process only those that contained words provided 
by at least 5% of participants. In this way, we obtained 19 different categories for both groups 
of interviewees. For these categories, we calculated the Cognitive Salience Index to identify 
elements with the best correlation between the frequency of apparition and the rank of 
importance (Table 1).
Table 1
Frequency, Importance Rank and Cognitive Salience Index
Structural elements SH LS
Freq IR* CSI** Freq IR* CSI**
Anxiety 21 3.2 1.07 5 2.6 0.21
Change 5 2.6 0.21
China 7 3.7 0.41
Contagion 8 2.8 0.36
Death 10 2.2 0.35 11 3.0 0.54Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.8
Family 5 3.2 0.26
Fear 20 2.8 0.89 12 2.8 0.55
Home 10 3.3 0.54
Isolation 5 3.0 0.25
Lockdown 6 2.8 0.27 6 2.7 0.27
Loneliness 5 3.0 0.24 6 2.8 0.28
Pandemic 12 2.4 0.46 22 2.6 0.94
PPE 15 3.5 0.83 12 3.9 0.77
Quarantine 22 3.8 1.33 20 3.7 1.21
Sadness 12 3.1 0.59
Social distancing 10 2.2 0.35
Study 5 3.4 0.28
Symptomatology 11 3.2 0.58
Virus 11 2.7 0.47 6 4.8 0.47
Note. * Importance Rank
** Cognitive Salience Index
The obtained data were then processed by the software IRaMuTeQ and treated with a 
similarity analysis, which enabled us to hypothesize the central core and the correspondent 
periphery configuration of the social representation of the COVID-19 disease, for each group 
of participants. The procedure consists of an elaborate matrix of similarity starting from the 
selected index, which depends on the nature of the relationship among the considered 
variables. In this case, we selected the Russel and Rao (1940) index, which is a distance 
measure (Chay, Lee, Lee et al., 2010; Hwang, Yang, Fitzgerald et al., 2001) used, in this 
study, because it excludes negative co-occurrences (Meyer, Garcia, Souza et al., 2004).
Answers to the open-ended questions were treated with categorical-frequency content 
analysis, using the "paper and pencil" method. Both the answers to the closed and scalar 
questions were processed by univariate statistical analysis to explore the distribution of the 
variables. The Chi-square statistical test was used to show significant connections between 
students’ groups and the observed variables. The significance level for all variables was set a 
priori at p < =0.05. Emotions were investigated by using a classification tree. All statistical 
analyses were performed using IBM-SPSS 25 software.
RESULTS
Internal Structure
In the analysis of rank-frequency relationships, we chose not to use the traditional fourquadrant representation (see Abric, 2003) but to use a synthesis index of these two indicators, Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.9
which, in our opinion, offers a more reliable hierarchy of the knowledge associated with the 
object of analysis. From a general descriptive point of view, the data obtained through 
hierarchical evocations can be summarized as follows. Social sciences and humanities 
students associated 152 different words to the inductor. One hundred ten of these words, 
corresponding to 72.4% of the entire semantic universe, recorded a single frequency of 
appearance. Life sciences students, for their part, freely associated 140 different words, 92 
(65.7%) of which were with a single frequency. We subjected these materials to 
lemmatization and, subsequently, to a semantic analysis using the justifications provided by 
each participant for each freely associated term. We also abolished all apices. Finally, we 
processed the results of this preliminary treatment using the Sutrop (2001) Cognitive Salience 
Index (CSI), a procedure that returns a decreasing hierarchical classification of the terms 
shared by at least 5% of the respondents1
in each subgroup (see Table 1). That index was 
calculated by the ratio of the following algorithm: CSIj = Fj/(N x Apj). In the formula, Fj 
corresponds to the number of respondents who mentioned the item j, N to the total number of 
respondents and Apj the average rank of appearance of each j. It is also a useful index for the 
comparison between distinct surveys and, above all, independent from the length of the lists 
subjected to analysis, obtaining a definitive hierarchy of priority, useful for analytical
decisions purified from the randomness that has always characterized traditional prototypical 
analysis.
Specifically, for students of social sciences and humanities, the constituent elements of 
the representation with the most significant cognitive salience were quarantine (CSI 1.33), 
which for participant SH-F_42
"was a preventive measure that had a big impact on my 
life". Anxiety (CSI 1.07) was associated by participant SH-F_9 with "everything that was 
happening in our days in front of our eyes and not knowing how to get out and face this 
situation". Fear (CSI 0.89) was identified, as student SH-F_23 says, because, "we are 
experiencing a situation that we have never experienced, and we do not know the remedy". 
Respondents assigned great importance to personal protective equipment (PPE) (CSI 0.83), as 
interviewee SH-F_12 says, "I feel protected from the virus". Finally, social sciences and 
1
In the studies conducted using the technique of hierarchical evocations, from the pioneering one of Grize, 
Verges, and Silem (1987) onwards, the minimum threshold of inclusion of terms to be treated with prototype 
analysis and similarities has always been two frequencies. In this study, it was decided to raise this threshold to 
the minimum sharing of 5% of the participants. That to reduce the cognemes included in the analytical outputs to 
those with a better level of sharing.
2 Participants alphanumeric identifier: SH/LS = Social Sciences and Humanities/Life Sciences; F/M = 
respondents’ gender; the number identifies the row in the dataset matrix.Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.10
humanities students experienced a strong sense of sadness (CSI 0.59) because, as SH-F_28 
says, they feel they are "losing a little piece of life". Furthermore, for life sciences students, 
the term that most identified cognitions related to COVID-19 was quarantine (CSI 1.21), 
which, as LS-M_30 states, "It is a word that was not part of everyday life". Participants in this 
subgroup frequently associated the word pandemic (CSI 0.94) with the inductor. For example, 
LS-M_6 justifies his choice by saying that "this virus has spread rapidly across several 
territories and continents, directly and indirectly involving the entire world population". "The 
mask has become everyday use for everyone, and you can no longer go out without it." (LSF_22) was one of the most frequent reasons for references to PPE (CSI 0.77) represented as 
needed and deserved by future doctors, in agreement with previous studies (Jaspal & Nerlich, 
2016). Participant LS-M_10's statement summarized the constant references to COVID-19 
related symptomatology (CSI 0.58): "Most clinical cases manifest as interstitial pneumonia". 
In addition, for this subgroup the reference to fear (CSI 0.55) was very frequent, which was 
well summarized by subject LS-M_3, who says, "I am afraid of being infected or infecting the 
people I deal with". Like many other medical students, interviewee LS-F_43 talks 
about death (CSI 0.54) because "It has been a disturbing reality in the last two months to see 
all these deaths and not be able to do anything concrete". Finally, many medical students refer 
to their home (CSI 0.54) because, as interviewee LS-F_4 says, "It is where I am living 24 
hours a day".
The configurations presented in the following graphs (see Figures 1 and 2) were useful 
to identify the existing interrelationships between the constitutive elements of the structure of 
the social representation of COVID-19. In fact, as mentioned previously, it is the articulation 
of structural elements, not only the hierarchy, that gives meaning to the entire representation. 
To weigh the strength of the semantic link among each structural component of the 
representation, we chose the aforementioned RR (Russel and Rao, 1940) coefficient. A 
parenthesis containing the value assumed by the link it has with the other concepts of the 
cluster, expressed in terms of Russel and Rao coefficient, will follow each concept belonging 
to a cluster.Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.11
Figure 1. SH Social Representation - Internal configuration
The first configuration (Figure 1) concerns social sciences and humanities students' 
representation of the COVID-19. As shown in the graph, and coherent with previous results, 
the elements with the highest link between them (RR: 0.16) and the most significant degree of 
relatedness were quarantine and anxiety, both showing five links with other terms. 
Interconnections existing between the distinct justifications that respondents provided to 
explain their free associations indicate the centrality of these categories in the social 
representation structure. For example, student SH-F_14 argues that "Ever since they let us go Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.12
out, I have been anxious to get the virus everywhere and I see the enemy everywhere". 
Quarantine, therefore, is also linked to the virus (RR: 0.08), PPE (RR: 0.08) and China (RR: 
0.05). The category labeled PPE refers to all equipment that will protect the user against 
health risks (masks, gloves, hand sanitizer, et similia). The reference to China identifies the 
geographical origin of the pandemic, as pointed out by respondent SH-F_13: "The first cases 
of COVID-19 occurred in Wuhan, China." The cluster dominated by the 
category quarantine presented an autonomous branch through the link with contagion (RR: 
0.08). The latter was connected to pandemic (RR: 0.06), which, in turn, was linked to social 
distancing (RR: 0.06). The explanation offered by the student SH-M_21 allows us to 
understand this associative trajectory: "The consequence of quarantine is social distancing, 
which increases individualism. In this case, thanks to our digital means, it has also created 
virtual cohesion. Perhaps in another era, this wouldn’t have happened."
Moving on to the constellation of concepts gravitating around anxiety, it was connected 
to lockdown (RR: 0.03), death (RR: 0.06) and sadness (RR: 0.11). The links between these 
concepts are well explained by participant SH-F_22, who says, "This virus leads to death, but 
not only because it attacks the immune system; it attacks above all the mental state of a 
person and, in this period, suicide rates have increased all over the world". The most crucial 
link within this aggregate was that between anxiety and fear (RR: 0.13), which in turn was 
significantly linked to loneliness (RR: 0.06). Respondent SH-F_37 clarifies this connection: 
"Day by day, one lives with the fear of surviving. Furthermore, fear leads us to involuntarily 
exclude and reject those around us". Interestingly, though weak, the existing link 
between fear and change (RR: 0.02), which for the SH-F_9 student, coincides with "Personal 
changes, environmental changes, economic changes" resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.13
Figure 2. LS Social Representation - Internal configuration
The second graph (Figure 2) concerns life sciences students. Additionally, in this case, 
the hierarchies outlined thanks to the Sutrop (2001) index were confirmed. Cognitively, the 
more salient terms are also those that exhibit the most reliable interconnectivity. Specifically, 
the words of student LS-F_33 explain the relationship between pandemic and quarantine well 
(RR: 0.13): "Quarantine is the aspect of the pandemic that has most affected people". 
The quarantine is linked to the COVID-19 virus (RR: 0.05) because, as interviewee LS-F_16 
recalls, some medical students have "studied it at length during the quarantine". This cluster Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.14
closes with the relationship between quarantine and solitude (RR: 0.03) clarified by the 
statement of student LS-F_57: "it has cleared the possibility to see each other, to embrace 
each other. My parents, doctors, tried to keep us as far away from them as possible".
Although the pandemic was not at the top of the ranking using the Cognitive Salience 
Index, it identifies the node with the highest clustering coefficient (Watts & Stogatz, 1998) of 
the entire representational structure because it is possible to observe as many as 8 of the 13 
arcs (61.5%) present in the graph branch out from this concept. Specifically, on the one hand, 
we find three measures useful to contain the pandemic, linked to lockdown (RR: 
0.03), isolation (RR: 0.03) and PPE (RR: 0.08). On the opposite side, we find the category 
that collects all references to symptomatology (RR: 0.1) of COVID-19, such as "pneumonia", 
"dyspnea", "cough" and "infections". The pandemic, for these future doctors, refers to the idea 
of death (RR: 0.08), considering that, as LS-M_58 recalls, "caused many victims". This 
category, therefore, is linked to that of the study (RR: 0.03) probably because, as reported by 
the student LS-F_43, everyone "tried to determine as much as possible about COVID-19". 
The cluster just described had two distinct branches. The first one originated from the link 
among pandemic, fear (RR: 0.07) and anxiety (RR: 0.05), well summarized by participant LSM_36: "The anxiety of returning to "normal", of being able to accomplish goals at home after 
three months, having at the same time, fear that everything could start again". The second one 
derived from the path among pandemic, home (RR: 0.05) and family (RR: 0.05), justified by 
the explanations given by interviewees LS-M_58: "The time spent in the household has 
increased" and LS-M_40: "I was at home for two months in a row".
Representational Content
To the first item on the questionnaire, concerning the knowledge of the object of analysis, all 
interviewees answered that they knew what COVID-19 was and talked about it frequently. 
79.4% of social sciences and humanities students and 72.1% of life sciences students stated 
that they talk about COVID-19, if not every day, at least 4 or 5 times a week (Table 2).
Table 2
How often do you talk about COVID-19?
Response category labels SH students LS students
Freq. % Freq. %Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.15
Every day 35 55.6 30 49.1
4 or 5 times a week 15 23.8 14 23.0
2 or 3 times a week 10 15.9 15 24.6
Once a week 2 3.2 1 1.6
Less than once a week 1 1.6 1 1.6
Total 63 100 61 100
When asked to specify who the main interlocutors were, all students involved in the 
study answered family (SH 61.9%; LS 59,0%) and friends (SH 33.3%; LS 39.3%) (Table 3). 
Table 3
Who do you talk to most frequently about COVID-19?
Response category labels SH students LS students
Freq. % Freq. %
Family 39 61.9 36 59.0
Friends 21 33.3 24 39.3
Acquaintances 1 1.6 1 1.6
Others 2 3.2 0 0.0
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 2.288 p-value: 0.51482 Yates’ Chi-square: 1.11 Yates’ p-value: 0.77466
The circumstances in which they discuss COVID-19 with others are "At home during 
television broadcasts and news coverage on the topic" (SH 39.7%; LS 47.5%), "At home 
during meals" and "Online with my contacts" (SH 19.0%; LS 16.4%) (Table 4). As shown by 
previous studies (Domínguez-Salas, Gómez-Salgado, Andrés-Villas, Díaz-Milanés, RomeroMartín & Ruiz-Frutos, 2020), the time spent on information on COVID-19, as well as the 
amount of time thinking about it, contributed to psychological distress and increased negative 
feelings. This emotional condition also characterized the interviewees, as described below.
Table 4
Under what circumstances do you most frequently discuss COVID-19 with others?
Response category labels SH students LS students
Freq. % Freq. %
At home during meals 12 19.0 10 16.4
At home if the topic is on television broadcasts, 
news…
25 39.7 29 47.5
At work/university/school, during breaks 4 6.3 2 3.3
Online with my contacts 12 19.0 10 16.4
When I go out and chat with friends... 7 11.1 9 14.8
Other 3 4.8 1 1.6Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.16
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 2.545 p-value: 0.76970 Yates’ Chi-square: 0.769 Yates’ p-value: 0.97897
The sources from which participants in the two subgroups draw their information about 
COVID-19 were television (SH 60.3%; LS 31.1%) and web (SH 38.1; LS 62.3%). Data in the
next tables (Tables 5 and 6) show an interesting difference between the two subgroups of 
participants concerning the use of the sources. Specifically, life sciences students preferred 
internet to television and were almost the only ones to use the following sources of 
information: journals, scientific blogs and specialized or institutional sites.
Table 5
Which of the following sources do you use most frequently to obtain information about 
COVID-19?
Response category labels SH students LS students
Freq. % Freq. %
Television 38 60.3 19 31.1
Web 24 38.1 38 62.3
Press 0 0.0 3 4.9
Other 1 1.6 1 1.6
Note. Chi-square: 12.466 p-value: 0.00595 Yates’ Chi-square: 10.149 Yates’ p-value: 0.01734
Table 6
Detailed sources most frequently used to obtain information about COVID-19
Response category labels SH students LS students
Freq Freq
Television
news 34 17
infotainment 4 2
Web
social network 3 2
on-line newspapers and news 11 9
journals, scientific blog and specialized sites 2 8
institutional sites 5 17
google (news) 3 2
Press
--- 3
Other 
I do not have a privileged source 1
I like to compare more references 1
Concerning respondents' beliefs about COVID-19, it is interesting to note that social 
sciences and humanities' students thought that the virus arose out of "Natural genetic Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.17
mutation" (17.5%), "Experiments/Laboratory error" (15.9%) or "Lack of hygiene in Chinese 
markets" (14.3%). In contrast, medical students believe that the current pandemic derives 
from "Spillover/Zoonosis" (29.5%), "Natural genetic mutation" (27.9%), "Lack of hygiene in 
Chinese markets" (11.5%) and "Human irresponsibility" (11.5%). Life sciences students 
exhibited greater technical competence, as expected, but surprisingly, also exhibited more 
considerable attention to human responsibility in determining the pandemic. Social sciences 
and humanities students were the only ones who thought that COVID-19 may have been born 
from a laboratory error and made direct reference to conspiracy theories (Table 7). These 
students also declared themselves to be primarily anti-political and non-partisan (see Table 
16). In Italy, the movements in which candidates represent these requests are also those that in 
the period considered, referred to these models of explanation in their public speeches.
Table 7
What are the origins of COVID-19?
Response category labels SH students LS students
Freq. % Freq. %
Experiments/Laboratory error 10 15.9 3 4.9
Lack of hygiene in Chinese markets 9 14.3 7 11.5
Natural genetic mutation 11 17.5 17 27.9
Human irresponsability 3 4.8 7 11.5
Spillover/Zoonosis 6 9.5 18 29.5
The Chinese eat bats and every kind of animals. 3 4.8 3 4.9
Conspiracy theories 6 9.5 0 0.0
Pollution/Ecosystem destruction 4 6.3 0 0.0
Its origin is still unclear 6 9.5 0 0.0
No answer 5 7.9 6 9.8
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 28.971 p-value: 0.00065 Yates’ Chi-square: 20.389 Yates’ p-value: 0.01566
Concerning anchoring processes, the two subgroups of participants did not seem to 
show significant differences. Basically, all respondents associated COVID-19 with the same 
disturbing events: Spanish flu (SH 33.3%; LS 45.9%), plague (SH 25.4%; LS 9.8%) and
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) (SH 14.3%; LS 18.0%) (Table 8). 
Table 8
To what disturbing event, to which you are already familiar, can COVID-19 be compared to?
Response category labels SH students LS studentsPapers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.18
Freq. % Freq. %
Spanish flu 21 33.3 28 45.9
Plague 16 25.4 6 9.8
SARS 9 14.3 11 18.0
It is comparable to nothing 5 7.9 2 3.3
War 4 6.3 4 6.6
Cholera 3 4.8 4 6.6
Earthquake 3 4.8 0 0.0
Ebola 0 0.0 3 4.9
H1N1 1 1.6 3 4.9
AIDS 1 1.6 0 0.0
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 15.146 p-value: 0.08701 Yates’ Chi-square: 7.985 Yates’ p-value: 0.53566
Concerning the other generative process, social sciences and humanities students 
objectified COVID-19 by ontologizing it in bats (41.3%) and other animal species (12.7%), 
such as lion, fish, insects, leeches, snakes, mosquitoes and hyenas. Even life sciences students 
used the bat (47.5%) to lend materiality to something as abstract as COVID-19. Unlike social 
sciences and humanities students, they ontologize the disease by using subjects involved in 
the front line in an attempt to combat it and with whom they identify: doctors, medical staff 
(13.1%) (Table 9).
Table 9
Which person, object, animal, etc. does COVID-19 make you think of?
Response category labels SH students LS students
Freq. % Freq. %
Bat 26 41.3 29 47.5
Different animals 8 12.7 2 3.3
Doctors, medical staff 4 6.3 8 13.1
Viruses, bacteria 3 4.8 2 3.3
China/Chinese people 2 3.2 4 6.6
Politicians 2 3.2 4 6.6
Shadow 2 3.2 1 1.6
Other 8 12.7 9 14.8
No answer 8 12.7 2 3.3
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 10.593 p-value: 0.22584 Yates’ Chi-square: 6.093 Yates’ p-value: 0.63681
As far as the perception of risk is concerned, both subgroups of respondents seemed to 
have little concern about either contracting COVID-19 personally or about the disease 
affecting those closest to them. When explicitly asked about these issues, students argued that Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.19
they consider the risk that their friends or family members might contract the virus as 
considerably low (SH 79.4%; LS 88.5%). In addition, for the personal risk of contracting 
Sars-Cov2 disease, all respondents were somewhat optimistic, using primarily the response 
modalities that constitute a positive pole of the attitudinal continuum (SH 82.5%; LS 93.4%) 
(Tables 10 and 11).
Table 10
Among the people you know/meet, the risk of contracting COVID-19 is:
SH LS
Freq. % Cum.% Freq. % Cum.% 
Very low 10 15.9 15.9 1 1.6 1.6
Moderately low 10 15.9 31.7 20 32.8 34.4
Slightly low 30 47.6 79.4 33 54.1 88.5
Slightly high 9 14.3 93.7 5 8.3 96.7
Moderately high 3 4.8 98.4 2 3.3 100
Very high 1 1.6 100 0 0.0
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 13.154 p-value: 0.02198 Yates’ Chi-square: 9.259 Yates’ p-value: 0.09917
Table 11
Your personal risk of contracting COVID-19 is:
SH LS
Freq. % Cum.% Freq. % Cum.% 
Very low 10 15.9 15.9 7 11.5 11.5
Moderately low 14 22.2 38.1 16 26.2 37.7
Slightly low 28 44.4 82.5 34 55.7 93.4
Slightly high 9 14.3 96.8 3 4.9 98.4
Moderately high 1 1.6 98.4 1 1.6 100
Very high 1 1.6 100 0 0.0
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 5.212 p-value: 0.39056 Yates’ Chi-square: 3.224 Yates’ p-value: 0.66549
With respect to expectations for the future, participants exhibited a great sense of trust 
considering that, again, they preferred the positive modalities of scales submitted to them. In 
particular, 76.2% of social sciences and humanities students and 83.6% of life sciences 
students believe that at the current state of medical knowledge, the COVID-19 is preferably 
and quite curable, while it will undoubtedly be in the near future (SH 100%; LS 100%) 
(Tables 12 and 13).Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.20
Table 12
At the current state of medical knowledge, COVID-19 is:
SH LS
Freq. % Cum.% Freq. % Cum.% 
Not at all curable 1 1.6 1.6 1 1.6 1.6
Very little curable 2 3.2 4.8 2 3.3 4.9
Not very curable 12 19.0 23.8 7 11.5 16.4
Rather curable 27 42.9 66.7 27 44.3 60.7
Quite curable 14 22.2 88.9 18 29.5 90.2
Curable 7 11.1 100 6 9.8 100
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 1.861 p-value: 0.86803 Yates’ Chi-square: 1.796 Yates’ p-value: 0.87659
Table 13
In the future, COVID-19 will be:
SH LS
Freq. % Cum.% Freq. % Cum.% 
Not at all curable 0 0.0 0.0 0 0.0 0.0
Very little curable 0 0.0 0.0 0 0.0 0.0
Not very curable 0 0.0 0.0 0 0.0 0.0
Rather curable 6 9.5 9.5 5 8.2 8.2
Quite curable 18 28.6 38.1 21 34.4 42.6
Curable 39 61.9 100 35 57.4 100
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 0.506 p-value: 0.99190 Yates’ Chi-square: 0.224 Yates’ p-value: 0.99883
Finally, we analyzed the emotions experienced by participants as a result of the 
COVID-19 pandemic (see Figure 3 and Table 14). We considered the scientific area of study 
as a response variable (with 2 modalities: SH students; LS students) and considered 11 
possible predictors coming from the factor's matrix. We built a classification tree to explain 
the relationship between group appurtenance and COVID-19-related emotions. Therefore, we 
defined the importance of each predictor (single emotion) concerning the dependency 
structure of the response variable (group appurtenance). The classification tree was made with 
IBM-SPSS 25 and built using the generalized Gini splitting function based on scores’ 
absolute differences. In particular, the cost of misclassification depends on the absolute 
differences in scores assigned to categories within the response. We obtained a selection of 
the optimal tree size with a procedure based on the cost-complexity metric. We selected the 
final tree via 10-fold cross-validation and used 1 − SE rule for the tree pruning procedure, 
identifying a final tree with ten terminal nodes. The misclassification error rate was equal to Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.21
0.298. The selected tree had L=6 terminal nodes. Figure 3 shows the classification tree 
obtained and Table 14 its reliability. We focused the analysis primarily on the differentiation 
between the two groups of students involved in the study.
Figure 3. Emotions’ classifications tree
Table 14
Classifications’ reliability
LS students SH students Percent 
Correct
LS students 36 25 59.0%
SH students 12 51 81.0%
Overall percentage 38.7% 61.3% 70.2%
Note. Growing Method: CRT – Dependent variable: Group
The most important node (terminal node 1) represents 71.0% of the interviewees and 
corresponds to the lowest number of confused by the situation. Respondents belonging to this Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.22
node (LS 59.1%; SH 40.9%) were characterized by low ratings (“not at all/very 
little/moderate”) concerning this emotion (<= Moderate). Looking to node 2, is it possible to 
see that confused obtained higher ratings (> Moderate) in 36 of the 124 interviewees, which 
were essentially social sciences and humanities students (75.0%). This node is divided by the 
relieved emotion. In this case, 23 of the 36 students who belonged to the node utilized "not at 
all" or "very little" to describe the intensity of this emotion (SH 95.7%; LS 4.3). Among 
others who used higher ratings (> Very little), life sciences students are more representatives 
(61.5%). Returning to node 1, it is divided by the grateful emotion. In particular, 46 of the 88 
students who experienced this emotion "very little" or "not at all" (37.1%) were mostly social 
sciences and humanities students (52.2%). On the other hand, 42 of the 88 who 
felt grateful (from "moderate" to "very strong") were essentially life sciences students 
(71.4%). The bored emotion split this node into two different sub-nodes. The first (node 7) 
was characterized by 28.2% (LS 80.0%) of respondents who considered themselves 
less bored (<= Strong). The second (node 8) was characterized by 5.6% of the sample who 
were very strongly affected by this emotion (> Strong). Finally, the last two nodes were 
generated by the emotion sad. Respondents belonging to node 9 (21.0%) were mostly life 
sciences students (88.5%) and suffered little sadness due to COVID-19. Furthermore, those 
(7.3%) who experienced higher levels of this emotion (> Moderate) and belonged to node 10 
were fundamentally life sciences students (55.6%).
At this point, we compared the results obtained to the taxonomy of three recurrent 
common sense explanatory patterns proposed by Eicher and Van Gerter (2015, p. 386): 
"Divine punishment, immoral or unhygienic actions of out-groups, and malevolent actions of 
powerful groups". Social sciences and humanities students seemed to use the pattern of 
malicious actions carried out by power groups, as they are the only ones who referred to 
conspiracy theories. In both subgroups of respondents, the pandemic pattern was absent as 
divine punishment, likely because about half of participants declared themselves nonbelievers (Table 15). In contrast, all students involved in the study used the pattern related to 
the unhygienic or sharable practices of the Chinese, summarized among others by categories 
of explanations, such as "Lack of hygiene in Chinese markets" (SH 14.3%; LS 11.5%) and 
"The Chinese eat bats and every kind of animals (SH 4.8%; LS 4.9%). The cited patterns, in 
line with those described by Eicher and Van Gerter (2015), interacted with patterns of expert 
scientific knowledge, which was the dominant explanation model for both social sciences and 
humanities and life sciences students.Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.23
Table 15
Religious orientation
Response category labels SH students LS students
Freq. % Freq. %
Agnostic 2 3.2 3 4.9
Non-practising believer 19 30.2 21 34.4
Practicing believer 7 11.1 11 18.0
Non-believer 31 49.2 22 36.1
No answer 4 6.3 4 6.6
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 2.686 p-value: 0.61167 Yates’ Chi-square: 1.729 Yates’ p-value: 0.78544
Table 16
Political orientation
Response category labels SH students LS students
Freq. % Freq. %
Anarchist 2 3.2 0 0.0
Antipolitical 9 14.3 0 0.0
Non-partisan 20 31.7 16 26.2
Center 3 4.8 1 1.6
Center right 1 1.6 2 3.3
Center left 5 7.9 19 31.1
Right 2 3.2 0 0.0
Left 17 27.0 20 32.8
No answer 4 6.3 3 4.9
Total 63 100 61 100
Note. Chi-square: 23.304 p-value: 0.0030 Yates’ Chi-square: 15.83 Yates’ p-value: 0.04488
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The Theory of Social Representations was created by Serge Moscovici (1961) as a system of 
knowledge elaborated and socially shared, orienting behaviors and intervening in the 
definition of individual and social identity, as well as in the construction of objects. It is 
transmitted through communication and language and has a practical purpose, guiding 
conduct and communication, being embodied in practices and participating in the construction 
of the social reality of a given group. Consensual within the group, these ideas may differ 
from those of other groups and are, therefore, "subject to dilemmas and conflicts. They are 
inseparable from social memory and are formed in deposits, some of which remain as 
traditional knowledge and some of which can be updated to give meaning to new situations 
that individuals face" (Jodelet, 2013, p. 41). As well illustrated in recent meta-analysis (Sousa, Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.24
Moura, Moura, Lago, Matos, Monte et al., 2017), the Social Representations Theory is 
applied in studies of different areas of knowledge, especially in psychology, and 
anthropology, collaborating in the elaboration of new images and conceptions about social 
reality, especially in the field of health and illness, whether old or new (Cañón Rodríguez, 
Marín & Fasanelli, 2018; Fasanelli, Galli, Grassia, Marino, et al., 2020).
In this framework, we designed and conducted this study in order to identify the social 
representation of COVID-19. More specifically, we tried to answer questions about the 
existence of differences between the social representations of COVID-19 elaborated by social 
sciences and humanities students and life sciences students. As is well known, talking about 
differences between social representations of the same object, it is necessary to address 
different representational structures. To verify this assumption, it is necessary to refer to data 
relating to the explicit content of the representation studied, in other words, to those data 
coming from the analysis of structures, as well as those derived from the analysis of 
generative processes, emotions, expectations and explanation models used by participants in 
the study.
Starting from the core and peripheral elements, the universe of the cognitions possessed 
by the interviewees about COVID-19 seemed to delineate two distinct articulations, despite 
the two subgroups sharing 65% of the constituent elements of the social representation's 
internal structure: quarantine, anxiety, pandemic, PPE, fear, death, virus, lockdown, 
and loneliness. These data appear to be consistent with previous studies that have highlighted 
that "outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases can be associated with considerable anxiety 
and fear in the general public or in specific communities, especially when the infection rate 
and deaths are substantial" (Lin, Hu, Alias, & Wong, 2020, p. 2). Mass fear of COVID-19 
originates a neologism, "coronaphobia", and generates a plethora of psychological 
manifestations across the different strata of society on the whole planet (Asmundson & 
Taylor, 2020 cit. in Dubey et al., 2020).
The differences in COVID-19 conceptions between the two subgroups seem particularly 
interesting. While social sciences and humanities students frequently referred 
to sadness, China, contagion, social distancing, and change, life sciences students often talk 
about the symptomatology of COVID-19, as well as home, study, family, and isolation.
"To be different, two representations must be organized around two different central 
cores. It is the organization of this content that is essential here. Two representations defined Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.25
by the same content may be radically different if the organization of this content, and thus the 
centrality of certain elements, is different" (Abric, 2001, p. 44).
As shown by the analysis of similarities, the internal configuration of the 
representations of COVID-19 allows us to speak of two completely different central cores. 
The first identifies the social sciences and humanities students and shows the emotional 
evaluation aspects of the situation. For these students, the quarantine invokes all negative 
feelings, such as anxiety and fear, as reported in some studies previously interviewed on the 
subject (Idoiaga Mondragon, et al., 2017b; Lee, Jobe, Mathis, & Gibbons, 2020). The second 
distinguishes the life sciences students and is strongly focused on the descriptive aspects of 
the situation: a pandemic that has determined the need to lock themselves in for a long period 
of quarantine. This good tolerance of the confinement measure, despite its brutal and 
constraining nature, undoubtedly has several explanations. One factor, as underlined by 
Ingold (2020), seems to have played a decisive role: shared anxiety in the face of the epidemic 
threat.
The two subgroups exhibited greater convergence when comparing the products of the 
generative processes of COVID-19's social representation. In line with what Paez and Pérez 
(2020) assert, the anchoring processes of our interviewees also referred to the "big" 
epidemics, from the oldest ones, such as the plague or the Spanish flu, to the most recent 
ones, such as SARS, H1N1 and Ebola. Unlike anchoring, participants' objectification takes 
different trajectories from those foreshadowed by the mentioned authors. Most students in 
both groups ontologized the Sars-Cov2 disease in a bat capable of giving reality to an 
unfamiliar concept. What previously resided in a very distant universe now appears physical, 
accessible, and at hand. Objectifying, after all, means discovering the iconic aspect of an idea 
or a poorly defined being, reproducing a concept in an object, in this case, an animal.
Interviewees also seemed to differentiate themselves from the emotions they 
experienced concerning the pandemic. At an overall glance, the feeling of confusion turns out 
to be the discriminating emotion. The most confused students were those from social sciences 
and humanities who also felt the least relieved in this dramatic situation (95.7%). Life 
sciences students also felt confused (49.2%); however, among them (59.2%), some students 
claimed to be more "grateful" (71.4%), less "bored" (80.0%) and less "sad" (88.5%) than their 
social sciences and humanities colleagues (Figure 3). In our opinion, the assigned importance 
to the emotion "confused" could be explained by the "unofficial and sometimes conflicting 
data circulating in the media. Of the multitude of people tested for COVID-19 in Italy, as well Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.26
as in other countries, it is unclear how many were asymptomatic versus symptomatic, and it is 
unclear whether a homogeneous criterion for testing was applied. Data are lacking on the 
prevalence of the disease among asymptomatic populations, so the real prevalence of 
COVID-19, its spectrum of presentation, and the real mortality rate all remain unknown" 
(Lazzerini & Putoto, 2020, p. e641).
The beliefs relating to COVID-19 also confirmed differences between the two groups. 
Participants in the social sciences and humanities group were the most inclined to adopt 
conspiracy explanation models (SH 25.4%; LS 4.9%), while those in the life sciences group 
exhibited their scientific competence with more considerable attention to the human 
responsibility in determining the situation. This difference was likely also explained by the 
types of sources used by respondents to learn about COVID-19. Future social scientists will 
make more use of traditional media, sharing a more consensual and emotional knowledge. In 
fact, according to Olagoke, Olagoke & Hughes (2020), frequent exposure to coronavirus 
disease news on mainstream media is associated with adverse psychological outcomes. In 
contrast, future physicians will use new media more consciously, considering that they are the 
only respondents who claim to use specific scientific literature on Sars-Cov2, as well as 
institutional sites, as evidenced by the correctness of their knowledge on the pandemic, 
overlapping with that of specialists in the field (Ruffell, 2020). As is well known "media is a 
relevant information source in construction of the social representation of the threat. Thus, it 
can be stated that the media form part of both the container of the information and the 
information content of the communication process" (Idoiaga Mondragon, Gil de Montes & 
Valencia, 2017a, p. 327).
Considering what we described so far, it seems legitimate to state that the two subsamples present two different social representations of the studied phenomenon. While social 
sciences and humanities students shared a representation dominated by emotional aspects of 
anxiety, life sciences students seemed to feel less threatened by the spread of the epidemic, 
sharing a social representation dominated by cognitive implications and possession of specific 
skills on the subject.
An interesting finding is represented by the fact that all interviewees were characterized 
by having entertained a high number of verbal interactions of informal type (family and 
friends) on the topic. According to Moscovici (1961), interpersonal communication is the 
privileged place of approximation, and within it, people exchange unverifiable information 
and improbable hypotheses. Within this kind of communication, all transformations, Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.27
interpretations and shifts of meaning, due to the absence of any kind of institutional and 
epistemic control, take place (Moliner, 2001). The only element that differentiates the choice 
of information sources between the two students’ groups is related to the use, by life sciences 
participants only, of specialized sources. Therefore, it seems that interviewees who showed 
greater control of their negative emotions did so because they were better able to search and 
select legitimate sources with accurate information (Joffe & Lee, 2004).
"Moscovici distinguishes two types of social representations: wet and dry. The former 
shape our social and individual reality directly, while the latter do so indirectly. Wet 
representations are more related to consciousness, therefore existence, and dry representations 
to science, therefore matter" (Kalampalikis, 2019, p.178, our translation).
The social representation of COVID-19 would have all the characteristics to be 
classified as a dry representation. It is an object inscribed within the technical knowledge of 
specific science, already starting from the acronym that identifies it. Not all people who use it 
in their daily talk know its real meaning (Co=corona, Vi=virus, D=disease, 19= 2019), 
precisely as most scientific concepts used in common language. The power to modify social 
behavior, which experienced COVID-19, pushes to include this representation among those 
defined as moist. It has been able, in a short time, to wedge itself into the collective 
consciousness, modifying the relationships of self and hetero perception (think about the 
alteration of the body scheme induced by the use of PPE) and even reshaping our lives.
To return to the broader theoretical-epistemological discourse from which we started, 
the results obtained lead us to reconsider the usefulness of applying the Theory of Social 
Representations within the strand of risk psychology. Unlike more traditional approaches to 
the perception of risk, Social Representations Theory does not limit its horizon to the 
correctness of the responses to risk. Whether they are false, weak, biased or deficient, Social 
Representations Theory deals with "why and how" societies create both social representations 
and the common sense that generates them (Joffe, 2002; 2003; Joffe & Lee, 2004).
By differentiating itself from the dominant approaches in the field of social cognition, 
the approach to social representations aims at overcoming, on the one hand, rationality as an 
epistemological model for thinking about man and, on the other hand, the "rational/irrational" 
opposition for studying beliefs in the field of health and disease (Apostolidis & Dany, 2012).
In other words and to conclude, according to this perspective, people look at risk 
through the filter of their group and historical/cultural belonging. Therefore, both from the 
contemporary imaginary to which they are exposed and from the adversities of the past and Papers on Social Representations, 29 (2), 8.1-8.36 (2020) [http://psr.iscte-iul.pt/index.php/PSR/index] 8.28
these elements, far from "distorting" the real risk, represent "reality" in the minds of the 
people who relate to it.
This study is not without limitations. The sample consisted of university students and 
was therefore not representative; hence, these results may not be generalizable to the Italian 
population (Montella, et al., 2019). The use of a mixed-methods design makes it challenging 
to establish causality and licenses a careful interpretation of the results. A media content 
analysis did not support our analysis of respondents' exposure to mass and social media. 
Nevertheless, the results are consistent with other studies, as shown in the Discussion and 
Conclusions section. The authors intend to extend the analysis to a larger population and, 
above all, to consider not only subjective perceptions and self-reports but also data related to 
social practices affected by the pandemic (i.e., doctors' professional practices) and other 
analytical dimensions. Projects along these lines are underway (Fasanelli, D'Alterio, De 
Angelis, Piscitelli & Aria, 2017).
We hope this study serves as a point of departure in an unprecedented situation and at a 
critical historical moment. We believe that these data provide useful information for 
comparison to other social groups or countries, especially in case of future epidemics.
Finally, such as our results may also be useful to a broader, non-expert audience, hoping 
that they may open up spaces for reflection on the theme of personal responsibility in the 
propagation and, therefore, in the prevention of phenomena, such as pandemics, apparently 
disconnected from the role of individual social actors. After all, as David Quammen pointed 
out, already in 2014, we humans dominate this planet such as no other species has ever done 
before. However, this has consequences, and some of them take the form of a pandemic. This 
is not something that has happened to us before and is the result of the things we do, and the 
choices we make. We are all responsible for the consequences (Quammen, 2014).




NEW PAPER






Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcah20
Cities & Health
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rcah20
The importance of nature to city living during the
COVID-19 pandemic: Considerations and goals
from environmental psychology
Lindsay J. McCunn
To cite this article: Lindsay J. McCunn (2020): The importance of nature to city living during the
COVID-19 pandemic: Considerations and goals from environmental psychology, Cities & Health,
DOI: 10.1080/23748834.2020.1795385
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23748834.2020.1795385
Published online: 30 Jul 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 4013
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles COMMENTARY AND DEBATE
The importance of nature to city living during the COVID-19 pandemic: 
Considerations and goals from environmental psychology
Lindsay J. McCunn
Vancouver Island University, Nanaimo, Canada
ABSTRACT
The COVID-19 pandemic has produced an opportunity for urban planners, government 
decision-makers, health practitioners, and environmental psychologists to further 
understand human psychosocial wellbeing in cities. Given a growing base of evidence 
illustrating that interaction with nature positively affects mood and mental health, 
preserving access to green spaces in cities during this time of mandated social isolation 
should be considered imperative for as long as possible. This think-piece highlights that 
parks, community gardens, and other natural areas are essential to urban dwellers, 
especially if directives to physically distance from one another become longstanding 
or recurrent. Public decision-makers should aim to develop simple, relatively inexpensive 
strategies to augment the usability of nature in innovative ways that make it possible to 
enjoy them while respecting distance guidelines. Also discussed is the notion that 
a predominant goal for social scientists and urban practitioners during this crisis will 
be to learn how people view the ways in which public parks and wilder urban areas 
mitigate their response to worry, isolation, and an altered form of civic engagement. 
Research on the extent to which ‘sense of place’ changes for city dwellers during this 
global circumstance will be important for planners and social scientists alike.
ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 3 May 2020 
Accepted 8 July 2020 
KEYWORDS 
COVID-19; nature; urban 
greenspace; mental health; 
access
The corona virus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has 
affected public health and safety around the world – 
and city planners, government decision-makers, 
health practitioners, and social scientists are working 
to examine the multifactorial nature of how people 
think, feel, and behave under isolated conditions 
(e.g., Van Bavel et al. 2020). An opportunity also 
exists to better understand the attributes of urban 
living that associate with human psychosocial wellbeing during a public health crisis – something that 
has not been fully explored, even after the severe 
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak in 26 
countries in 2002 and 2003 (Sim and Chua 2004, 
World Health Organization 2020). The relatively 
few studies focusing on the psychosocial ramifications of the SARS emergency describe intense emotional responses from healthcare workers and 
community members during the outbreak, and for 
months afterward (Maunder et al. 2003). Significant 
and debilitating fear of contagion, feelings of stigmatization, loneliness, boredom, anger and anxiety, as 
well as a sense of uncertainty were common emotional responses (Leung et al. 2003, Maunder et al. 
2003). These outcomes can be reasonably expected 
from the current pandemic and are now beginning to 
emerge in an interdisciplinary body of literature (e.g., 
Yao et al. 2020).
In 2020, the impact of COVID-19 on public health 
created a global circumstance that continues to compel many individuals to stay at home and avoid close 
interaction with others. Fear and uncertainty naturally 
accompany sudden directives from health authorities 
to dramatically change our social lives and the ways in 
which we use our local city spaces. Naturally, people 
often wish to be in the proximity of others as they 
combat pessimism and distress. Thus, despite the 
authoritative guidelines put forward by government 
bodies in many cities to close or restrict access to parks 
and other natural spaces where people tend to gather 
in groups, these are, arguably, the very environments 
that should be explicitly communicated for use during 
this time, as long as physical distancing suggestions 
are observed.
This is because preserving public access to parks 
and natural areas in cities can allow people to maintain, at a safe and responsible distance, a sense of 
community threatened by the loss of other indoor 
social hubs, such as coffee shops and pubs, and to 
cope more easily with what is being asked of them 
with respect to physical restrictions. Environmental 
psychologists have known for some time that simply 
looking at nature can improve mood, and that exposure to natural environments can make the demands 
of urban life seem more manageable. Spending time in 
CONTACT Lindsay J. McCunn lindsay.mccunn@viu.ca Department of Psychology, Vancouver Island University, Nanaimo BC V9R 5S5, Canada
CITIES & HEALTH 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23748834.2020.1795385
© 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Groupnature has been shown to reduce the human stress 
response and augment physical and mental health 
(Collado et al. 2017), and exposure to natural landscapes improves our emotional experience almost 
immediately (Neill et al. 2018). Being in contact with 
nature can also increase prosocial behaviors like generosity, helpfulness, and cooperation (Weinstein et al. 
2009). Children who grow up near natural areas tend 
to engage in pro-environmental behavior (Cheng and 
Monroe 2012) and spend time in nature as adults 
(Thompson et al. 2008). These eco-conscious outcomes of having access to nature across the life span 
seem to bring about a sense of connectedness to nature 
and foster attitudes of conservation and sustainability – important facets that ought not be overlooked 
during the COVID-19 crisis.
Although small-scale natural features that are often 
present in cities, such as street trees, lawns, green 
courtyards, and private gardens are undoubtedly 
important, they may not be visually or behaviourally 
accessible to everyone, depending on the location of 
a residence and the type of dwelling, such as a highrise building without a yard or view of nature. Many 
types of dedicated green spaces within cities, such as 
parks and community gardens, often afford the space 
and the social norms for spontaneous social contact 
and opportunities for relationship-formation between 
neighbours (Peters et al. 2010). Indeed, the biophilia 
hypothesis (see Wilson 1984) would suggest that, 
through an innate love of nature, seeking out natural 
settings is a universal aspect in our lives, drawing our 
attention and interest while giving us a sense of pleasure and peace. When we live in buildings without 
accessible views or proximity to trees, grass, and other 
wild attributes, we tend to understand our problems to 
be more severe and less soluble compared to those 
who live in greener areas (Kuo 2001). Findings like 
this are relevant to the current situation where 
a definitive end point to the stress involved with the 
pandemic does not yet exist.
Strengthening the intersections between environmental psychology, urban planning, and public 
health is perhaps now timelier than ever, and investigating how to utilize natural spaces in cities in 
order to mitigate some of the psychosocial ramifications of the present public health emergency 
involving loneliness, anxiety, and depression is 
undoubtedly prudent. Programs that target urban 
green spaces to offer therapeutic interventions for 
populations who are more vulnerable, such as 
youth, those who live with cognitive deficits, the 
elderly, and individuals experiencing post-traumatic 
stress disorder (among many others) could be 
expanded to help small groups from the general 
public who feel emotional stress and a need for 
social cohesion (Barton and Rogerson 2017). 
Similarly, the framework of ecotherapy programs 
that center on horticulture, conservation techniques 
for native plants and animals, nature-based arts, 
and so on could be used to scaffold and extend 
communication strategies to the general public that 
nature exposure, in many forms and in a number 
of ways, can help alleviate some of the newfound 
pressures on mental health in the face of COVID19. Additional community-based research can be 
undertaken to understand (and perhaps counter) 
public considerations and assumptions about the 
disadvantages of using natural areas during times 
when fewer people are out in public. We know that 
a sense of naturally-occurring surveillance in open 
public places tends to improve perceptions of safety 
in urban areas, and that neighbourhoods with features that encourage walking rather than driving 
are often thought to be safer (Foster et al. 2015). 
City planners and social scientists may wish to ask 
residents through formal survey methodology or 
via online community forums about risk perception 
concerning public parks and natural areas during 
this unprecedented time.
gAnother immediate goal for social scientists, 
health researchers, and urban practitioners during 
(and directly after) this crisis will be to learn about 
how residents themselves understand the degree to 
which public parks and wilder urban areas mitigate 
their response to physical and psychological isolation. Evidence put forward by interdisciplinary 
research that includes qualitative and quantitative 
methods and variables germane to environmental 
psychology may serve to bolster arguments for city 
officials to leverage public dollars to augment existing green spaces in ways that afford and communicate their psychological benefits to residents more 
directly. One important and accessible variable to 
examine in urban dwellers may be the psychological construct of sense of place. Studies that explore 
whether the psychological construct of sense of 
place, and its three dimensions of place attachment, 
place identity, and place dependence (see Jorgensen 
and Stedman 2001) have been altered by the recent 
barriers to using parts of one’s city will be helpful 
for social scientists and planners, especially when 
understood with demographics in mind, such as 
income, number of children in the household, 
proximity to green space, and changes to employment status. It is possible that place attachment 
(the emotional bond we have to a place) will be 
not have been significantly altered at the individual 
level – it may even be strengthened, as sometimes 
tends to occur after natural disasters and significant 
place loss (Brown and Perkins 1992). Brown and 
2 L. J. MCCUNNPerkins (1992) note that for some types of disruptions to stable place attachments, perceived place 
loss can make way for a period of stress, followed 
by a ‘post-disruption phase’ of coping before new 
attachments can be formed to place and space. 
Likely, the dimension of place dependence for 
a neighbourhood or community will be perceived 
to be lower if people can no longer use particular 
areas to achieve behavioural goals. However, it is 
possible that, depending on proximity, new place 
dependencies have formed for some people during 
the pandemic and are understood to be satisfactory – and are perhaps even missed when social 
restrictions are eased. Place identity may also be 
affected as people learn how to understand themselves in relation to places that have not been able 
to be utilized as expected or desired for lengthy 
periods of time. It will also be critical to examine 
how attitudes about nature in urban settings vary 
alongside objective data about usage that is likely 
being captured by social geographers and planners 
in major cities at this time. These data can be 
interpreted with respect to many types of human 
settlements that vary in size, landscape, climate, 
and social and cultural norms.
Given the growing base of evidence illustrating that 
physical interactions and emotional connections with 
nature positively and therapeutically affect our mood 
and psychological wellbeing, preserving access to green 
spaces in cities worldwide during times of mandated 
physical isolation should be considered imperative for 
as long as possible. City parks, community gardens, 
urban conservation areas, and other types of natural 
spaces will arguably become even more essential to 
urban dwellers if the directive to physically distance 
from one another becomes longstanding or recurrent. 
Municipal decision-makers play a role in developing 
simple, relatively inexpensive strategies to secure and 
augment the usability of nature in innovative ways so 
that it is possible to enjoy these settings while respecting 
physical distance guidelines. Over time, it may be sensible to allocate funding and resources toward the 
development of additional natural environments in 
cities to support and satisfy populations that include 
those who can no longer reliably utilize indoor communal areas as a way of meeting their wellbeing needs 
in times of extreme stress and improbability.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
Notes on contributor
Lindsay J. McCunn, PhD is a professor of psychology at 
Vancouver Island University and the Chair of the environmental psychology section of the Canadian Psychological 
Association. She is an Associate Editor of the Journal of 
Environmental Psychology and has published a wide range 
of applied research in interdisciplinary journals focusing on 
social science, urban planning, design, and health.



NEW PAPER




Scholarship of Teaching and Learning
in Psychology
Applying Positive Psychology to Foster Student
Engagement and Classroom Community Amid the COVID19 Pandemic and Beyond
Tsz Lun (Alan) Chu
Online First Publication, October 19, 2020. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/stl0000238
CITATION
Chu, T. L. (A.) (2020, October 19). Applying Positive Psychology to Foster Student Engagement
and Classroom Community Amid the COVID-19 Pandemic and Beyond. Scholarship of Teaching
and Learning in Psychology. Advance online publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/stl0000238Applying Positive Psychology to Foster Student Engagement and
Classroom Community Amid the COVID-19 Pandemic and Beyond
Tsz Lun (Alan) Chu
University of Wisconsin – Green Bay
Positive psychology is the study of well-being, which includes 5 essential elements—
positive emotions, engagement, relationships, meaning, and accomplishment
(PERMA). Applying positive psychology teaching strategies can therefore foster student engagement and classroom community, especially in an online modality and
during the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic in which social
connections are more important and yet harder to establish than ever. The aims of this
teacher-ready theory review are to (a) briefly review the PERMA model and its research
and application in education, (b) describe my implementation of three positive psychology teaching strategies—strengths identification and application, growth mindset,
and gratitude exercises—during the pandemic, as well as their effects based on my
observation and student feedback, and (c) offer practical considerations, including
some caveats, for instructors to attend to when implementing these strategies in any
courses at any time albeit particularly helpful in the face of adversity. Finally, I
conclude this article with some tips of being a positive teacher and some of my
reflections teaching during the pandemic in the hope of “flattening the emotional
distress curve.”
Keywords: college teaching, gratitude, growth mindset, PERMA, strengths
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/stl0000238.supp
The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has changed the world—causing lockdowns, anxiety, and deaths. It also has changed,
and will continue to change, education in terms
of course delivery and learning modality as a
result of mask-wearing and physical distancing
guidelines. In March 2020, universities in the
United States and across the globe announced
campus closure within weeks of the COVID-19
outbreaks; faculties had to convert their inperson courses to online modalities, and college
students struggled with moving home and learning in an online environment (Crawford et al.,
2020; Johnson, Veletsianos, & Seaman, 2020).
Human connections had seemingly lost when
students switched learning from interacting
with instructors and classmates on campus to
seeing images and text on a computer screen, let
alone stayed at home. “Flattening the COVID-19 curve” to slow down the spread of the
virus was certainly important, whereas “flattening the emotional distress curve” that arose during these challenging and uncertain times was
arguably as, if not more, important (Kaslow et
al., 2020).
As many students were distressed and missed
the social aspect of education, we, psychology
instructors, could apply positive psychology
teaching strategies to flatten our students’ emotional distress curve, as well as to facilitate their
I am thankful to the UW-Green Bay CATL (Center for
the Advancement of Teaching & Learning) Team for providing tremendous instructional support during the transition to alternative course delivery, and to Drs. Caroline
Boswell and Kate Burns for leading a workshop on building
equitable and inclusive teams in the classroom with the
asset mapping activity. They have helped me be a more
positive and effective instructor.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to X Tsz Lun (Alan) Chu, Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin – Green Bay, MAC C309,
2420 Nicolet Drive, Green Bay, WI 54311. E-mail:
chua@uwgb.edu
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Psychology
© 2020 American Psychological Association 2020, Vol. 2, No. 999, 000
ISSN: 2332-2101 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/stl0000238
1learning and engagement, amid this global crisis
that had long-lasting impacts. This article is
organized in three main sections, in which I (a)
briefly review the theoretical framework of positive psychology and its research and application in education, (b) describe the teaching strategies (what, why, and how) I implemented
during the pandemic and their effects based on
my observation and student feedback, and (c)
offer practical considerations and some caveats
for instructors to attend to when implementing
these strategies in any courses at any time albeit
particularly helpful in the face of adversity.
Finally, I conclude this article with some tips of
being a positive teacher and some of my reflections teaching during the pandemic.
The PERMA Model
Among the many theories of well-being (see
Dodge, Daly, Huyton, & Sanders, 2012), Seligman (2011) proposed a well-being theory that
consists of five essential, measurable elements—positive emotion, engagement, relationships, meaning, and accomplishment—the
PERMA model. The theory posits that all people pursue these five elements for their own
sake in various domains (Seligman, 2019).
Within education, positive emotions are important for broadening and building student
perception of resources to deal with challenging academic tasks and daily life (Brunzell,
Stokes, & Waters, 2016; Fredrickson, 2001).
Engagement allows for implementation of
strengths and skills to meet any tasks and
challenges, such as learning difficult academic contents (Seligman, Ernst, Gillham,
Reivich, & Linkins, 2009). Relationships in a
classroom with adequate quantity and quality
of positive interactions, from instructor-tostudent to student-to-student, can facilitate
positive learning outcomes (Gable, Impett,
Reis, & Asher, 2004). Meaning includes serving and doing something larger than oneself;
for instance, students can learn the value of
perseverance and resilience during adversity
and apply their strengths to live a purposeful
life (Brunzell et al., 2016; Seligman et al.,
2009). Accomplishments perceived by students can remind them about their potential to
grow and succeed even when they have struggles in school and in life (Brunzell et al.,
2016).
Research has shown that school and classroom interventions can target each PERMA element to effectively increase K–12 and college
students’ psychological resources, which are
particularly important for those experiencing
mental health challenges such as depression and
trauma (Brunzell et al., 2016; Seligman, 2019).
Applying positive psychology teaching strategies was therefore particularly important when
stress and anxiety were on the rise during the
pandemic—a mass trauma we experienced collectively (Horesh & Brown, 2020; Kaslow et
al., 2020). Beyond family, higher education
might be the only social context within which
college students had human interaction amid the
pandemic and thus served as a unique intervention point. As instructors, we should provide
structured opportunities for students, rather than
assume that they have the ability on their own,
to experience positive emotions, engagement,
and classroom community during these challenge times (Brunzell et al., 2016; Kaslow et al.,
2020).
Although there is an exhaustive list of positive psychology strategies, some of the most
common and effective ones instructors can implement are as follows (see Bolier et al., 2013;
Brunzell et al., 2016; Lambert, Passmore, &
Joshanloo, 2019 for detailed descriptions): (a)
Positive emotions—implementing gratitude and
“what went well” activities to capitalize on positive experiences; (b) Engagement—engaging
and empowering students to identify, practice,
and apply their strengths and values in learning;
(c) Relationships—applying active-constructive
responding for positive interactions through
capitalizing good news and supporting efforts;
(d) Meaning—teaching and emphasizing the
value of resilience during adversity and traumatic experiences through storytelling and connecting students to causes beyond the self; and
(e) Accomplishment—embedding goal setting
and growth mindset messages that encourage
students to frame their beliefs about success as
dynamic and to grow over time. Thus, in the
following section, I illustrate how to implement
teaching activities for individual and group
strengths identification, growth mindset, and
gratitude alongside positive instructions for enhancing PERMA while focusing on engagement and relationships.
2 CHU
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.Implementation of Positive Psychology
Teaching Strategies
Teaching Context
In Spring 2020, I taught three undergraduatelevel courses—in-person research methods in
psychology (n  22), in-person physiological
psychology (n  43), and online physiological
psychology (n  42)—in a Midwestern regional university. My students were primarily
White (about 90%) and female (about 80%);
most were traditional college-aged students,
whereas my online course consisted of about
half traditional and half nontraditional (i.e.,
older, having a full-time job) students.
To foster student engagement, classroom
community, and psychological well-being in
turn during the pandemic and stay-at-home order,1 I implemented three structured positive
psychology strategies in the two in-person
courses that were moved online. I explain each
strategy below in the format of what it was, why
I chose it, how I implemented it, and how it
worked based on my observation and student
feedback. The student feedback was mostly
qualitative, obtained through course evaluation
toward the end of the semester, while additional
quantitative data related to the gratitude exercise were also collected.
Strengths Identification and Application
In positive psychology, strengths are character traits that are authentic, energizing, and fulfilling to people (Seligman, Steen, Park, & Peterson, 2005). Every semester, I asked my
students in my research methods course to identify and apply their individual as well as team
strengths in a group research project—the main
assignment throughout the course. Identifying
character strengths and applying them to overcome challenges and optimize performance is
the most common exercise in positive psychology classroom interventions that can increase
student engagement, social skills, and enjoyment in school (Seligman, 2019; Seligman et
al., 2009).
One of the biggest student concerns toward
group projects is unequal individual contributions to groupwork (LaBeouf, Griffith, & Roberts, 2016), which may be attributed to differences in academic backgrounds, communication styles, and personal assets and interests,
and more importantly, misunderstanding of and
bias toward those differences (Pfeifer & Stoddard, 2019). For instance, it is not uncommon
for me to hear Student A (a “Type A,” extroverted student) complaining that Student B (a
“Type B,” introverted student) does not contribute actively in group conversations or take initiative to do tasks; and hear Student B defending
that Student A dominates group conversations
or always decides and assigns tasks for each
group member to do. These differences seemed
to have heightened when the course delivery
changed from in person to online (LaBeouf et
al., 2016; Young & Bruce, 2011), because some
students were not responsive to group communications (Horesh & Brown, 2020). Engaging
students to practice and apply their assets and
strengths, individually and with their groups,
can empower students to clarify their values and
learning goals, align their actions to those, and
work collaboratively to stay on track during
these challenging times (Ryff & Singer, 2008;
Seligman, 2011).
The activity I implemented immediately after
groups were formed, and before the pandemic,
was creation of asset maps that highlight individual and group strengths (Pfeifer & Stoddard,
2019). During class, students first reflected on
their own identities and strengths by drawing an
asset map that represented them (see the online
supplemental materials and https://digital
commons.wpi.edu/gps-research/14/). Then,
they discussed these identities and strengths
with their group members to know each other
better, followed by completing a group asset
and task assignment chart. The chart displayed
how the group divided up the tasks among
members to best utilize their strengths throughout the group research project (see the online
supplemental materials). For example, students
decided which member(s) would be mostly responsible for organizing and compiling information, communicating with the instructor, analyzing data, and so forth. Because of time
constraints in the intensive research methods
course, I gave students the autonomy to identify
their own strengths; instructors, however, could
1 One of the three strategies, strengths identification and
application, was planned before and emphasized during the
pandemic.
POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY TEACHING AMID COVID-19 3
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.ask students to complete formal assessment of
their strengths such as the VIA Character
Strengths Survey that is free (https://www
.viacharacter.org/) and the CliftonStrengths Assessment that has a cost (https://www.gallup
.com/cliftonstrengths/en) to potentially reduce
bias and stereotypes regarding perception of
strengths (Pfeifer & Stoddard, 2019). After transitioning to online course delivery, I asked students to reflect on how they could keep on using
their strengths to handle the pandemic situation,
work with their groups in a different way, and
succeed together.
Focusing on strengths helped my students set
proper individual and group goals and determine how each group member wanted to engage
with the course material and group assignments,
thus fostering autonomy, engagement, and position interactions (Brunzell et al., 2016; Seligman et al., 2009). Vulnerable students, in particular, could build confidence when labeling
and working with their strengths (Brunzell et
al., 2016). In addition, my students stated that
they were able to assign group tasks based on
strengths and learn each other’s identities and
stories throughout the course. When I was
aware of students’ individual and group
strengths, I also could better support students
through a more individualized approach such as
aligning personalized feedback with their
strengths (e.g., creativity, judgment). Furthermore, reminding students about practicing and
applying their strengths during the pandemic
enhanced their perceived ability to continue
schoolwork and deal with life stressors (Waters,
2011). The asset mapping activity before the
pandemic planted the seed for promoting positive emotions, engagement, classroom community, and resilience during the pandemic.
Growth Mindset
Mindset is the belief, which everyone holds,
regarding the nature of intelligence and abilities
(Dweck, 2006). In my research methods course,
I introduced the concept of mindset by indicating the research behind it, coupled with my
personal experiences, assignments, and feedback that instilled a growth mindset both in
learning and in life. A growth mindset that
frames abilities as malleable and changeable
with hard work and practice, instead of a fixed
mindset that frames abilities as inborn and not
changeable, allows students to see challenges
and mistakes as opportunities to grow to become more intelligent and resilient (Brunzell et
al., 2016; Dweck, 2006). Mindset also influences stress appraisal (Jamieson, Crum, Goyer,
Marotta, & Akinola, 2018). “COVID-19 feels
like an ongoing ‘cardiac stress test’ on the
world’s infrastructures and systems, magnifying
our every functional and structural vulnerability, including that of the field of traumatic
stress” (Horesh & Brown, 2020, p. 332). Yet,
students kept on attending classes virtually with
the intentions and hopes to succeed, but might
find themselves frustrated and demanding when
achieving below their normal academic standards. A growth mindset could lead students to
believe that they could persist amid uncertain
circumstances, embrace challenges and learn
from them, and trust that effort and instructor
feedback contribute to growth and success, all
of which promote student engagement (Dweck,
2006). Whereas early mindset research found
positive effects of growth mindset mainly on
children and adolescents (Dweck, 2006), recent
studies have shown that one-session brief interventions, as short as 30 min to an hour, have the
potential to enhance the use of effective learning strategies and academic performance in college students (Broda et al., 2018; Lewis, Williams, & Dawson, 2020).
During the early stage of transitioning to online teaching and learning, many of my students
reported feeling stressed and some told me that
they felt like a failure after completing an SPSS
assignment that was difficult partially due to the
online learning modality. Therefore, I introduced the concept of mindset the next class
based on research from Dweck (2006) and neuroplasticity (Broda et al., 2018; Lewis et al.,
2020), provided open-access activities (e.g.,
“Mistakes are Opportunities”, “Supercharge
Your Goals”; https://www.khanacademy.org/
partner-content/learnstorm-growth-mindsetactivities-us/high-school-activities) for the students to complete if they wish, and created an
extra credit assignment for students to reflect on
when and how they used a growth versus fixed
mindset in the research methods course (see the
online supplemental materials). In addition to
dealing with challenges and failures, the extra
credit assignment included a goal-setting element for the students to adopt a growth mindset
more intentionally, which enhanced student en4 CHU
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.gagement and a sense of accomplishment by
focusing on effort and the process of learning
and growth (Brunzell et al., 2016). For example,
one student wrote, “I would like to start consuming research more frequently. I want to
challenge myself to interact with research and
scientific articles outside of what I am required
to do within my classes. I feel that this would
make me a better informed and well-rounded
individual.”
Moreover, when providing comments on students’ introduction drafts for the research paper,
I included growth-oriented feedback—“I’m
giving you these comments because I have very
high expectations and I know that you can reach
them”—which has been shown to promote student engagement, instructor–student relationship, and academic performance (Yeager et al.,
2014). Yeager et al. (2014) revealed that this
feedback increased middle school students’
ability to receive criticism and the chance that
they revised their paper, the Whites by 40% and
the Blacks by 320%, compared with those who
received neutral feedback. My class had the
same phenomenon that all of my students revised their drafts (compared with some who did
not before I implemented this strategy) when
submitting their final paper; several students
even reported in the course evaluation that the
growth-oriented feedback was the most motivating feedback they had received.
During the last week of the semester, I employed storytelling with my personal experience
to further strengthen the concept of growth
mindset to enhance students’ resilience and instructor–student connections (Brunzell et al.,
2016; Landrum, Brakke, & McCarthy, 2019).
Specifically, to foster common humanity and
compassion (Neff, 2003), I shared my own life
challenges and academic failures during my undergraduate studies to connect to some students’ current situations, and then discussed
how I used the word “yet” in my growthoriented self-talk to overcome these academic
and personal struggles (Dweck, 2006). Sample
statements included “I don’t do well in college
. . . yet,” “I’m not good at research... yet,” and
“I can’t feel well emotionally . . . yet,” which
served as a tool for students to remind themselves to stay positive and engaged (Lewis et
al., 2020). In response to the course evaluation
question “what positive strategies or approaches
did you use to support yourself and your learning in this course, during the remote instruction
phase of the Spring 2020 semester,” about 30%
of my students in the research methods course
answered a growth mindset, which would likely
carry over into their future classes and challenges.
Gratitude
Gratitude can be defined as a positive emotion that people experience when an undeserved
situation or act of kindness occurs (McCullough, Emmons, & Tsang, 2002). During
the pandemic, I added weekly online discussions that included gratitude exercises in my
physiological psychology course. The past two
decades of research has shown that gratitude
interventions increase feelings of gratitude that
lead to greater optimism, resilience, connectedness to others, and general well-being (Brunzell
et al., 2016; Davis et al., 2016). Among these
interventions, creating gratitude lists or counting blessings, as well as writing gratitude letters
or verbally expressing gratitude to others, are
the most common and effective gratitude exercises (Davis et al., 2016). For instance, Rash,
Matsuba, and Prkachin (2011) asked young
adults in the gratitude intervention group to
reflect on and write down one thing about people, items, or events that they were grateful for
twice a week for four weeks. Compared with
the control group who wrote down memorable
events, the gratitude group had greater increases
in physiological coherence (i.e., less stress responses), self-esteem, and life satisfaction. In
higher education, weekly gratitude journaling in
a management education class improved student engagement and meaning in learning
(Flinchbaugh, Moore, Chang, & May, 2012).
As students’ stress and depressive symptoms
heightened during the pandemic, I incorporated
gratitude lists into the weekly discussion posts
that were simple to implement. During the first
week of the online discussions after the course
moved online, I explained to my students the
benefits of gratitude and showed them videos on
the underlying physiological mechanisms with
concepts relevant to the course content. Then,
the students completed weekly discussions with
members in their group, which was established
before the pandemic, on each new chapter and
included three things they were grateful for over
the past week (see the online supplemental maPOSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY TEACHING AMID COVID-19 5
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.terials). The gratitude items ranged from academic performance to physical health to various
hobbies (e.g., watching Netflix, baking) that the
students developed during the stay-at-home period. These gratitude exercises engaged the students to interact with their group members with
empathy that built collective positive emotions
and classroom community throughout the semester. For instance, one student mentioned
being grateful that “my sister recently had a
baby, and the baby is perfectly healthy,” and all
group members responded with positivity and
congratulations messages.
To evaluate student perceptions of the gratitude exercises, I administered two short surveys, one at the start of the transition to online
course delivery and one toward the end of the
semester, in both of my “in-person” (with gratitude exercises) and online (without gratitude
exercises) physiological psychology courses.
Within this 4-week period, students completing
gratitude exercises, on average, reduced stress
(Mchange  0.42 vs. 0.33 of 5) and increased
gratitude (Mchange  0.36 vs. 0.11 of 15; Emmons & McCullough, 2003), to larger extents
than those who did not. When asked to “describe your thoughts and emotions on completing gratitude exercises,” an overwhelming number of students reported that they had felt more
positive and connected to both me (i.e., the
instructor) and their group members because of
the weekly gratitude exercises. Some students
even took this exercise to the next level by
practicing gratitude every day, “I have made
gratitude journaling a part of my nightly routine
...I spend about 10 minutes drinking a cup of
tea, meditating, and writing down at least three
things I am grateful for each night”; “For the
month of April, I had a gratitude calendar which
gave me a different prompt every day to think
about. It helped me be thankful for things I
wouldn’t typically think about.” To further
strengthen students’ positive emotions and connections with me during the last week of the
semester, I expressed my own gratitude to students for their hard work and support for group
members throughout the semester.
Practical Considerations in Positive
Psychology Applications
Although positive psychology teaching strategies may be particularly helpful for fostering
positive emotions, student engagement, and
classroom community during difficulty times
such as the COVID-19 pandemic, these strategies are conductive to building students’ coping
skills in a “normal” world in preparation for any
difficult circumstances (Vela, Smith, Whittenberg, Guardiola, & Savage, 2018; Waters,
2011). Given that the rates of depression (10.1%
in 2009 and 18.1% in 2018) and anxiety (10.5%
in 2009 and 22.1% in 2018) had doubled over
the last decade (Hoban, 2019) and that the rates
and conditions would likely worsen as a result
of the pandemic and social isolation, positive
psychology teaching strategies became even
more relevant in college coursework. Gaining
positive psychology tools helps college students, especially those who have been marginalized or traumatized, navigate not only academic challenges but also nonacademic ones in
their personal life (Brunzell et al., 2016; Vela et
al., 2018). For instance, application of both
character strengths and a growth mindset is
important for students to thrive through challenges such as economic downturns and events
involving social injustice and inequity; practicing gratitude, regardless of life circumstances,
allows for generation, intensification, and continuation of positive experiences that promote
overall well-being and academic engagement
(Flinchbaugh et al., 2012). There are many possibilities beyond the pandemic for instructors to
apply positive psychology teaching strategies to
promote students’ PERMA, although to do so
effectively, it does take intentionality in finding
a good fit among the course content, student
characteristics, and current events.
Instructors can implement the previously discussed positive psychology teaching strategies
in various ways—synchronously or asynchronously, on an individual or group level, and as
an assignment or class activity—each comes
with its own advantages and challenges. Instructors are encouraged to think critically
about their pedagogy behind the chosen strategies in consideration of the personal (e.g.,
teaching philosophy, training background, communication style) and environmental (e.g., students’ technology access, class size, time constraints, group composition and trust) factors.
Depending upon the student demographics and
whether courses are conducted synchronously
or asynchronously, instructors should apply
strategies in ways that are equitable to all stu6 CHU
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.dents; synchronous messaging and videoconference tools may enhance engagement and camaraderie, whereas asynchronous communication
could allow for deeper discussions and instructor feedback in more personalized ways (Young
& Bruce, 2011). Another key consideration is to
align teaching strategies with the instructor’s
and students’ strengths, as well as the course
objectives and contents. It should not be difficult for psychology instructors to find a natural
intersection between positive psychology and
course contents based on research and realworld examples (Lambert et al., 2019; Seligman
et al., 2009). For instance, I discuss the research
findings and physiological aspects of mindset
and gratitude when introducing those in my
research methods and physiological psychology
courses.
Several caveats are warranted when implementing activities specifically related to
strengths, mindset, and gratitude. If instructors
ask students to self-identify strengths in the
aforementioned strengths identification and asset mapping activities, they should be cautious
of any student bias or stereotypes that may
either overestimate or underestimate abilities
and skills. Specifically, male students are more
likely to mention math and technical skills as
their assets, whereas female students are more
likely to identify with conflict management and
organizational skills (Pfeifer & Stoddard,
2019). Instead of assuming that students can see
their own bias and stereotypes, instructors can
use this opportunity to discuss some typical
stereotypes associated with certain identities for
students, especially those who consist of more
dominant and privileged identities, to recognize
potential marginalization issues behind
strengths identification and groupwork (Pfeifer
& Stoddard, 2019). Before teaching the concept
of mindset through the previously mentioned
mindset assignment or storytelling, instructors
should be aware of students’ initial mindsets
and abilities through formal or informal assessments, or wait for a “teachable moment” that
they recognize students’ fixed mindsets. Given
that growth mindset interventions may not be as
effective for students who are White (vs. Black)
or high achieving (Broda et al., 2018; Yeager et
al., 2014), and that more and more students
learn about mindset in K–12 education (Yeager
et al., 2019), instructors who teach primarily
White and high-achieving students may consider applying growth mindset indirectly (e.g.,
through instructions) and invest more time in
other positive psychology teaching strategies.
With regard to incorporating gratitude lists or
counting blessings, instructors need to pay attention to their students’ characteristics and receptivity to the exercise. Some recent studies
have revealed that expression of gratitude could
sometimes cause feelings of indebtedness, guilt,
or other adverse reactions, especially for people
who are perfectionistic or disagreeable (Davis et
al., 2016), or when people express gratitude
toward someone important to them (Oishi, Koo,
Lim, & Suh, 2019). Therefore, when including
gratitude exercises, instructors should consider
cultural and personality factors, provide guidance regarding the goal or target of the gratitude, and obtain early feedback from students.
In addition to applying positive teaching
strategies, we should remind ourselves that we,
the instructors, are a positive tool as well! When
students conceptualize classroom community, it
includes connections with classmates as well as
with the instructor (Young & Bruce, 2011). In
fact, the most common factor of all positive
education interventions is that positive teachers
are the ones who implement them (Seligman,
2019; Waters, 2011). To this end, active–
constructive responding is a positive psychology strategy that can contribute to the quantity
and quality of positive instructor statements by
capitalizing the good things (Gable et al., 2004).
For instance, for every mistake that a student
makes on an assignment, instructors can find
several good things to comment on, or use active–constructive responding to emphasize one
good thing for multiple times. When designing
assignments and class activities, instructors
should make sure to include “what is right”
beyond “what is wrong” that is frequently discussed in psychology courses. For example, if
abnormal or clinical psychology instructors
have students analyze patient cases with clinical
symptoms using DSM criteria, they can ask
students to include positive coping strategies in
the treatment plan and potential positive outcomes after treatment.
Beyond being positive and growth-oriented,
feedback and communications should be frequent in order for students to engage in sustained, goal-directed learning (Brunzell et al.,
2016). Providing regular feedback and being
available, for the whole class and individual
POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY TEACHING AMID COVID-19 7
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.students, also adds meaning and connections to
online learning, especially during challenging
times such as the pandemic (Kaslow et al.,
2020). The student responses, to the question
“what positive strategies or approaches did this
instructor use during the remote instruction
phase of the Spring 2020 semester,” I received
the most beyond the use of positive psychology
strategies were “the professor is always available,” “the professor is very quick in responding
to e-mails,” “the professor is very encouraging,”
“he would always do check-ins and even included gratitude in our grade,” which corroborate with what Sitzman and Leners (2006) found
regarding the importance of perceived instructor caring in online education.
Conclusion
Student engagement and classroom community are important for education at any given
time, although they may be particularly important for online learning experiences and during
challenging times such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Applying positive psychology teaching
strategies has the potential of enhancing these
learning outcomes along with student wellbeing, particularly among vulnerable students
such as those who are minorities or who experience mental health or confidence issues. I introduced in this article the rationales for and the
process of implementing some of the most common positive psychology concepts—strengths,
mindset, and gratitude—in teaching during the
pandemic, whereas other strategies are available
for instructors to try depending upon their
course contents and structures (Brunzell et al.,
2016; Lambert et al., 2019; Seligman, 2019). At
the time of this writing, we were experiencing a
surge in COVID-19 cases in the United States;
institutions were unsure of how to deliver
courses using in-person, hybrid or blended, and
online modalities. To practice what I preach, I
am going to apply my top five character
strengths—love of learning, curiosity, perspective, teamwork, and zest—to stay positive and
engaged in my teaching in the hope that we can
flatten both the COVID-19 and the emotional
distress curves. Finally, I am sincerely grateful
for the opportunity to teach such a hardworking
and resilient generation of students, to learn and
apply new teaching strategies, and to grow as a
lifelong learner and educator.


NEW PAPER


ARTICLE IN PRESS
JID: WJAM [m5G;August 25, 2020;17:54]
World Journal of Acupuncture – Moxibustion xxx (xxxx) xxx
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
World Journal of Acupuncture – Moxibustion
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/wjam
Analysis of the influence of the psychology changes of fear induced by
the COVID-19 epidemic on the body ✩
Qianwei LIU () a
, Guozhen ZHAO () b
, Bo JI () a,1,∗
, Yitian LIU () a
,
Jingyu ZHANG () a
, Qiujie MOU () a
, Tianyu SHI () a
a School of Acupuncture-moxibustion and Tuina, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 100029, China (, 100029,
) b Beijing Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100010, China (,  100010, )
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Available online xxx
Keywords:
COVID-19
Fear
Fear injury kidney
Kidney
Psychology
a b s t r a c t
In this paper, the theory of “Fear injury kidney” in traditional Chinese medicine is systematically reviewed, and it is found that long-term or excessive psychological changes of fear are likely to damage
kidney qi and kidney essence. On this basis, the psychological studies of patients, medical staff and the
public during the COVID-19 epidemic in China were analyzed, and fear psychology was found to be prevalent among all kinds of people. Modern researches on “Fear injury kidney” have also found that long-term
or excessive fear could cause changes in the neuro-endocrine-immune system, which can induce diseases
or susceptibility to some diseases. Therefore, during or after the prevalence of COVID-19, different groups
of people may have emotional reactions such as stress and fear, which should be paid long-term attention, and the influence of fear on the body cannot be ignored. According to the change rule of psychological state under stress reaction, we should actively respond to and take psychological crisis intervention
measures in time to reduce the harm of psychological stress to the body.
© 2020 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of World Journal of Acupuncture Moxibustion House.
Introduction
The COVID-19 epidemic has spread to more than 200 countries and regions worldwide, and many countries in the world have
entered the first-level response to public health emergencies. The
increasing number of confirmed and suspected cases, as well as
news reports on the development of the epidemic, have brought
people different degrees of psychological pressure, fear, nervousness and other stress reactions. on January 26th, 2020, the National Health Commission of China promulgated the guiding principles of Emergency Psychological Crisis Intervention in the Epidemic
Situation of Pneumonia Infected by Novel Coronavirus. It put forward
the scheme of real-time research, classified intervention and orderly serviceto actively deal with the anxiety and psychological
stress problems of patients, medical staff and the public that may
be caused by the epidemic, so as to reduce the psychological interference and possible psychological harm caused by the epidemic.
✩ Supported by the National Key R&D Program of China: "Modernization Research
of Traditional Chinese Medicine" Key Special Project (no. 2019YFC1710100).
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jibo678@263.net (B. JI).
1 Research direction: Effect of acupuncture and moxibustion on regulating body
balance.
In the COVID-19 diagnosis and treatment plan formulated by medical and health departments at all levels in China, there is also
a special emphasis on strengthening psychological counseling for
patients’ anxiety and fear. According to Chinese medicine, the five
emotions injure the internal organs, and the kidney is in fear. Modern research has found that if the “fear” stress response is not relieved for a long time, it will affect the body’s nervous system, thus
inducing sleep disorder, or will affect vascular endothelial function resulting in the occurrence or recurrence of hypertension and
cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, or even it affects the
body’s specific and non-specific immune functions, induces the decline of immunity, and is susceptible to diseased such as COVID-19
and tumors [1–5]. This article intends to systematically discuss the
understanding of fear in traditional Chinese medicine, psychological harm caused by COVID-19 epidemic to people and the impact
of psychological change of fear on body formation. The purpose is
to provide guidance for the clinical construction of diagnosis and
treatment system to protect the body from fear.
The understanding of “fear injury kidney” in TCM
According to TCM, the kidney is in fear, while too much will
hurt the internal organs. Fear of injuring the kidney is mainly manifested in two aspects: injure the kidney essence and injure the
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wjam.2020.06.007
1003-5257/© 2020 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of World Journal of Acupuncture Moxibustion House.
Please cite this article as: Q. LIU, G. ZHAO and B. JI et al., Analysis of the influence of the psychology changes of fear induced by the
COVID-19 epidemic on the body, World Journal of Acupuncture – Moxibustion, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wjam.2020.06.0072 Q. LIU, G. ZHAO and B. JI et al. / World Journal of Acupuncture – Moxibustion xxx (xxxx) xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
JID: WJAM [m5G;August 25, 2020;17:54]
kidney qi. First of all, in terms of fear of injuring the kidney
essence, Sùwèn)Plain Questions(said: “The kidney controls
water, it receives and stores jing (Essence) from Zang-fu Organs.” It
is suggested that the essence of the five viscera is sealed by the
kidney. If the kidney essence is damaged and the sealing is not
solid, physiological or pathological changes will occur. Língshu¯)
The Spiritual Pivot(said: “Constant fear without relief will damages essence and damage of essence will cause weakness of bones,
exhaustion of yang qi and habitual seminal emission.” It shows
that too much fear or long-term fear will lead to kidney essence
damage, and then lead to bone soreness, syncope cold and so
on. The kidney stores essence and produces marrow in the main
bone, which plays a role in promoting growth and development. If
the kidney essence is deficient, the bone marrow metaplasia will
become passive and the bone will be unnourished. Children are
prone to bone dysplasia, five kinds of retardations and five kinds
of flaccidity, etc. Adults are prone to sore waist, sore knees and
weak feet, etc. The elderly people are prone to bone fragility and
osteoporosis, easy to fracture and so on. The brain is the sea of
marrow, The Spiritual Pivot said:“When the sea of marrow is insufficient, it will cause dizziness, tinnitus, aching legs, diminution of
vision, blurred vision, lassitude and somnolence.” It shows that if
the kidney essence is insufficient, the mind will be empty, mostly
manifested as tinnitus, deafness, forgetfulness, dull spirit, malaise
and so on. In addition, The Spiritual Pivot said: “Constant fear and
anxiety damage the spirit and the damage of the spirit will lead to
excessive loss of essence”. In clinical practice, it can also be seen
that the kidney essence is injured by panic, resulting in the loss
of the spirit, and then there are wild words, laughter, endless acts
and so on. Secondly, in terms of fear of injuring the kidney qi,
Plain Questions said: “I hear that all diseases are born in qi, anger
leads to qi, joy leads to slow qi, sadness leads to qi dissipation,
and fear leads to qi deficiency.” It shows that excessive fear will
lead to the release of qi, resulting in symptoms such as slippery
semen, incontinence and so on. It is also mentioned: “Fear leads
to loss of essence which then results in obstruction of upper energizer, consequently leading to return of qi and distension of lower
energizer. That is why it is said that qi sinks.” This suggests that
excessive fear will cause the qi to drain too, and diseases caused
by the imbalance of qi movement in the upper energizer will occur in clinical practice. In addition, the kidney stores the essence
of the five internal organs, while the lung is the mother of the kidney and the liver is the son of the kidney. If panic occurs and other
reasons deplete the essence of the kidney, and if the kidney deficiency, the internal organs will lose nourishment, resulting in various abnormalities in the heart, liver, spleen, lung and other viscera.
On the contrary, as we all know, illness of mother viscera affecting the child one and illness of child viscera affecting the mother
one, other visceral diseases can also affect the kidney. It prevents
the kidney from storing essence and aggravate fear. It is suggested that kidney disease can interact with other internal organs
disease.
The occurrence of fear in the COVID-19 epidemic
Due to the COVID-19 epidemic has a long incubation period
and is highly infectious, the population is generally characterized
by a lack of specific preventive drugs and methods, asymptomatic
COVID-19 and double positive COVID-19 occur. All of these have
brought panic to people and caused people to have psychological
problems in varying degrees. The secondary major psychological
crisis caused by this epidemic is attracting the attention of many
researchers.
Psychological status of patients
In this epidemic, some studies have found that when patients
are diagnosed as suspected cases, most patients will fall into a
psychological state of crisis, often with abnormal emotional excitement, shock, denial, anger, and do not cooperate with treatment work; while when patients are in isolation treatment, there
is an increased sense of fear of the disease, accompanied by anxiety and depression [6]. Critically ill patients show a state of
extreme anxiety because of respiratory distress and difficulty in
expression, and often feel panic, despair and a sense of near
death [7]. In previous studies, questionnaires were used to analyze the mental health status and influencing factors of COVID19 diagnosed patients and isolated visitors. It was found that
the number of COVID-19 diagnosed patients and isolated visitors
who felt anxiety/tension was the most, 47.46% and 64.29% respectively, and the number of people who felt desperate was the least,
1.69% and 5.36% respectively [8]. In another study, 148 patients
with COVID-19 were investigated with self-rating anxiety scale
and self-rating depression scale. The results showed that the incidence of anxiety was 21.63% and the incidence of depression was
50.00% [9].
Psychological status of medical staff
In the COVID-19 epidemic, medical workers risk being infected
by the virus at any time, and suffer from a variety of physical and
mental distress in the rescue process, mainly manifested as physical reactions such as physical decline, dizziness and dyspnea, accompanied by psychological changes such as fear, anxiety, depression, fear and so on. First of all, there are studies on the psychological status of medical staff in the epidemic situation. The
symptom checklist 90 (SCL-90) was used to analyze the psychological status of the medical staff in the designated hospitals in
Wuhan City, Hubei Province. It was found that, compared with the
Chinese adult norm [10], the average scores of SCL-90 of the medical staff in the front line of COVID-19 ’s epidemic situation has
significant differences in somatization, anxiety and phobia [11]. In
another study, combined with the methods of filling in the scale
and online investigation, the mental health status of 224 front-line
medical workers in Wuhan during the prevention and control of
COVID-19 epidemic situation were investigated. It was found that
29.9% of the medical staff in Wuhan had anxiety [12]. Another
study used a questionnaire to investigate the psychological status of 168 anti-epidemic front-line health care workers, and found
that there were varying degrees of anxiety, fear, helplessness and
other psychological stress reactions among anti-epidemic front-line
health care workers. 73.2% of the health care workers will have
anxiety. Among them, 13.1% of the health care workers are often
anxious, while 10.7% of the health care workers often have fear
[13]. In addition, there are special studies on the psychological
status of nurses. The symptom checklist 90 (SCL-90) was used in
a study [14] to investigate and analyze the psychology of 41 clinical front-line support nurses who took part in the fight against
COVID -19. It was found that 35 (85.37%) had adverse emotional reactions, of which 21 had terrorist emotional reactions, accounting
for 51.22%, indicating that most clinical front-line nurses had psychological stress reactions. In another study [15], self-made general
data questionnaire, self-rating anxiety scale (SAS), self-rating depression scale (SDS) and stress scale (PSS-10) were randomly distributed to the front-line nurses supporting Wuhan for investigation. The results showed that the incidence of anxiety and depression of 44 nurses supporting Wuhan were 31.8% and 45.5% respectively.
Please cite this article as: Q. LIU, G. ZHAO and B. JI et al., Analysis of the influence of the psychology changes of fear induced by the
COVID-19 epidemic on the body, World Journal of Acupuncture – Moxibustion, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wjam.2020.06.007Q. LIU, G. ZHAO and B. JI et al. / World Journal of Acupuncture – Moxibustion xxx (xxxx) xxx 3
ARTICLE IN PRESS
JID: WJAM [m5G;August 25, 2020;17:54]
Psychological status of the general public
Panic, disappointment, fear, irritability, over-optimism and sadness are all possible psychological conditions of the general public.
People with weaker physique think they are more likely to be infected, so they are more likely to develop anxiety, depression and
fear. Excessive anxiety and fear caused by a sense of threat can
lead to physical symptoms, such as headaches and physical fatigue.
This symptoms are similar to COVID-19, which can make people
unsettling and increase bad mood. In the process of self-isolation,
it is easy to cause depression, sadness, despair, panic and fear, and
even extreme fatigue, low spirits, hard to think and concentrate
every day. A study [16] conducted a telephone interview with 217
randomly selected residents. The self-made "simple questionnaire
on the basic knowledge of COVID-19 was used to evaluate the residents’ cognition of COVID-19. The generalized anxiety scale (GAD7) and the patient health questionnaire depressive symptom group
scale (PHD-9) were used to evaluate the anxiety and depression
state of the residents. It was found that the anxiety detection rate
was 7.83%. The detection rate of depression was 5.53%. Another
study [17] conducted a questionnaire survey on 599 women who
received assisted pregnancy treatment. It was found that fear was
the main manifestation of mental state during the COVID-19 epidemic period. Urban women with high education level and good
family economic conditions have the most serious fear.
Modern research on the influence of fear factors on the body
Fear is a strongly repressed emotional experience when people
are faced with dangerous situations and are powerless to get rid
of it, and it is one of the most widely studied emotions [18]. With
the increase of modern mental and psychological diseases, the incidence of phobia is increasing year by year. The psychological pressure caused by excessive panic will destroy the balance of yin and
yang, which may not only make the old disease recur, but also promote the emergence of new symptoms. More and more studies
have found that long-term fear can induce anxiety, hypochondria,
depression and other emotions. By affecting the neuro-endocrineimmune system, it has an impact on human growth and development, reproductive function, urinary function, respiratory function,
digestive system, mental and emotional activities and other aspects
[19,20].
Fear affects human nerves - endocrine system
The "kidney" of traditional Chinese medicine is related to the
neuro-endocrine system [21], and the functional state of the kidney
is closely related to the neuroendocrine system [22]. Some studies
have suggested that "kidney deficiency syndrome" is related to the
functional changes of hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis, which
further affects the endocrine function of the body [23]. Some studies have found that the value of urinary-17 hydroxycorticosteroids
in patients with kidney yang deficiency syndrome is significantly
lower than normal, and it is preliminarily inferred that adrenocortical metabolic disorder may be a link in the mechanism of kidney
yang deficiency in traditional Chinese medicine [24]. Another study
repeated urine-17 hydroxyl examination in patients with kidneyyang deficiency every year for seven years, which confirmed the
above conclusion [25]. In addition, ACTH test was used to observe
the process of adrenocortical hormone synthesis and catabolism. It
was established that the main link in the pathogenesis of kidneyyang deficiency was the dysfunction of pituitary-adrenocortical
system. In another study, through ACTH test, Su-4885 test and circadian rhythm determination of blood 11-hydroxycorticosterol, it
is proved that the syndrome of kidney-yang deficiency is the dysfunction of hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenocortical axis in different
degrees and different links [26]. Therefore, fear can affect the human neuroendocrine system by affecting the "kidney" function of
traditional Chinese medicine.
Fear impact body’s immune system
In recent years, with the help of clinical and animal studies,
the effect of fear on the immune function of the body has been
explored. First, in terms of clinical research, some studies found
that erythrocyte immune function and complement CRA function
decreased in patients with kidney deficiency, indicating that patients with kidney deficiency would have different degrees of specific immune dysfunction [27]. 51Cr release method was used to
detect the activity of NK cells in peripheral blood of 61 patients
with kidney deficiency, the results showed that the activity of natural killer cells in plasma of patients with kidney deficiency was
strongly inhibited [28]. In addition, the changes of T cell subsets in the elderly were analyzed, and it was found that CD3+
and CD4+ were significantly decreased, CD8+ was significantly increased, CD4+/CD8+ was significantly decreased, and T cell immune
function was decreased in the elderly, especially in the elderly with
kidney deficiency [29]. A series of monoclonal antibodies OKT were
used to detect T lymphocyte subsets in peripheral blood of 57 elderly patients with kidney deficiency syndrome. It was found that
T cell subsets were significantly decreased in T3 and T4, while T8
was significantly increased. It was confirmed that there was cellular immune dysfunction in kidney deficiency syndrome [30]. By
measuring the activity and sensitivity of interleukin-2 (IL-2) in the
blood of patients with kidney deficiency, it was found that the activity and sensitivity of IL-2 in patients with kidney deficiency decreased significantly [31]. Secondly, in animal research, the natural model of “fear injury kidney” was made by using cats to intimidate mice, and it was observed that the weight of thymus and
spleen decreased [32], indicating that kidney deficiency can lead to
the atrophy of immune organs. Other studies also found that the
ultrastructure of spleen and thymus in animals with kidney yang
deficiency were obviously destroyed [33].
In summary, the kidney deficiency syndrome caused by “fear
injury kidney” can not only affect the immune function of the body
through the neuroendocrine system, but also directly affect the immune function of the body, involving the specific and non-specific
immune function of the body. In this epidemic, the immune system is the body’s key line of defense against the virus. Studies have
shown that most of the patients admitted to COVID-19 have lymphocytopenia [34]. People with low immune system are the highrisk groups of COVID-19 this time [3]. Long-term fear may make
the body more likely to be infected with COVID-19.
Discussion
In the face of public health emergencies, it is a normal psychological stress response for people to show moderate worry and
fear. It can enable people to quickly raise their awareness of selfprevention, strengthen prevention ability and defensive measures.
However, excessive worry will also cause people bad emotions
such as anxiety, fear, pessimism and depression, which will affect the human body psychologically or physically and lead to dysfunction of the body [35]. In this paper, we analyzed the previous
research on the psychological factors of all kinds of people during COVID-19 period, and found that the secondary psychological
changes caused by this epidemic situation have been paid more
attention to, and the questionnaire survey scheme is often used
in the research. Based on the diagnosis and isolation of patients,
there were a large proportion of anxiety and depression, and excessive fear, sadness, helplessness and mood swings, etc. For medical staff, high-intensity work and heavy treatment tasks, lack of
Please cite this article as: Q. LIU, G. ZHAO and B. JI et al., Analysis of the influence of the psychology changes of fear induced by the
COVID-19 epidemic on the body, World Journal of Acupuncture – Moxibustion, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wjam.2020.06.0074 Q. LIU, G. ZHAO and B. JI et al. / World Journal of Acupuncture – Moxibustion xxx (xxxx) xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS
JID: WJAM [m5G;August 25, 2020;17:54]
release of stress will make medical staff enter a state of psychological stress, resulting in their own anxiety, depression, panic, sleep
disorders and so on. The general public are more prone to panic,
disappointment, fear, irritability and so on. COVID-19 has brought
varying degrees of psychological impact on diagnosed and suspected patients, health care workers and the public, which will not
only cause physical discomfort, but also emotional stress reactions.
Long-term or excessive fear of psychological changes can easily
damage the kidney qi and kidney essence, resulting in changes
in the neuroendocrine-immune system, and then induce disease
or some disease susceptibility. There are many ways to reduce
anxiety and fear in modern medicine, such as medicine, relaxation training, self-suggestion, cognitive behavior and dialectical
cognitive behavioral therapy and so on. TCM intervention measures are based on traditional Chinese medicine concepts such as
"unity of man and nature" and "integration of body and spirit".
They have great advantages in regulating emotional changes, including traditional Chinese medicine, acupuncture and tuina, TCM
behavioral therapy, TCM emotional therapy and so on. When treating fear with acupuncture, especially for cases with fear of injuring the kidney essence, sìshéncong) ¯ EX-HN1, (shéntíng)
DU24, (x¯ınshu)¯ BL15, (dansh ˇ u¯)BL19, (shènshu¯)BL23,
(zhìshì)BL25(and xìmén)PC4(are chosen [50]. The five-tone
therapy of traditional Chinese medicine and the guiding method of
traditional Chinese medicine are worth considering in treating the
fear induced by the epidemic because of their fewer side effects
and simplicity.
At present, the following problems still deserve attention: first,
many surveys during COVID-19 showed that front-line health care
workers, staff, patients, middle-aged, elderly people and parturients are the groups that psychological survey researchers pay more
attention to. Among many negative emotions, more attention is
paid to anxiety and depression, while less attention is paid to negative psychological problems such as panic and fear, which is related to the use of scales related to anxiety and depression in previous surveys, such as generalized anxiety scale (GAD-7), health
questionnaire depression symptom group scale (PHQ-9) and so on.
Second, anxiety is the worry about the expected danger, panic is
the manifestation of the acute escalation of anxiety, and panic is
the spread of anxiety in the group [34]. However, in many investigations during or after the epidemic, the attention to the fear of
the subjects is not enough.
Internationally, there are dozens of psychological scales to evaluate an individual’s fear of many different things, including: 1)
scales to assess fear of specific disease, such as carcinoma disease
[36] or Alzheimer’s disease [37]; 2) there are specific vulnerable
groups’ fear of specific events, such as Parkinson’s fear of falling
[38], cancer patients pair fear of cancer recurrence [39], fear of
childbirth in pregnant women [40], Surgical Fear Questionnaire,
(SFQ) [41]; 3) Fear of progression(FOP) [42], Fear of progression
questionnaire short form (FOP-Q-SF);4) Fear of specific events, such
as acrophobia [43], flying phobia [44] etc.; 5) Measures of more
general fear, such as social phobia [45], evaluation of fear [46],
fear of public speaking [47], fear of offense crime [48], etc. In this
epidemic of COVID-19, 717 Iranians were selected as subjects in a
study. Based on the existing fear scale, combined with expert evaluation and participant interview, they were evaluated with classical experimental theory and Rasch model, and the COVID-19 fear
scale (FCV-19S) was established [49]. For COVID-19 fear scale selection and development, except readability and comprehensibility of
entries in addition to being essential, it should also have good reliability, validity and high feasibility, so as to facilitate a wide range
of clinical applications.
A correct understanding of the disease and nursing care offer,
and a comprehensive understanding of the relevant prevention and
treatment measures, are of great significance for the prevention
and treatment of psychological problems caused by the COVID-19
epidemic. In the rescue of the emergency response to this major
public health emergencies, the construction of mental health during the epidemic should be strengthened, and the psychological
problems of different groups of people should be highly concerned,
especially the psychological state of the people in the areas with
serious epidemic and the frontline personnel fighting against the
epidemic. The psychological problems involved in this epidemic
still need to be paid continuous attention for a long time after the
end of the epidemic, and it is necessary to formulate a reasonable
screening program. In addition to the psychological and emotional
assessment of anxiety and depression, we should pay special attention to the assessment of fear, so that early diagnosis and timely
intervention can be done to reduce the psychological damage and
follow-up psychosocial problems caused by the epidemic.


NEW PAPER


SHORT COMMUNICATION
COVID-19 disease and nutritional choices: How will the pandemic
reconfigure our food psychology and habits? A case study of the
Italian population
Mariarosaria Savarese a,b
, Greta Castellini a,b,
*, Lorenzo Morelli a,b,c
,
Guendalina Graffigna a,b
a EngageMinds HUB e Consumer, Food & Health Engagement Research Center, Italy bUniversità Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Faculty of Agricultural, Food and Environmental Sciences, Italy
cUniversita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Istituto di Microbiologia, Italy
Received 1 July 2020; received in revised form 15 October 2020; accepted 16 October 2020
Handling Editor: A. Siani
Available online 21 October 2020
KEYWORDS
Food psychology;
COVID-19;
Disease preventions;
Behavioural change;
Healthy diets
Abstract Background and aims: In Italy, the spread of the novel coronavirus (SARS-Cov-2)
required lifestyle changes that have affected food choices and people’s health condition. We
explore people’s perception of the role of food consumption as a preventive measure and how
it reconfigures consumption habits.
Method and results: We conducted an online survey of a representative sample of 1004 Italian
citizens. Around 40% of the population perceive that strengthening the immune defences
through nutrition is not important to reduce the risk of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
infection. People with lower levels of perceived importance are slightly younger and have a less
healthy lifestyle. They are less worried about the emergency. During the last months, they have
bought less food supplements and also intend to decrease their purchase in the next 6 months.
Conclusion: In COVID-19 pandemic, scholars underline the importance of having a strong immune system. However, the Italians who attribute less importance to food that helps the immune system seem to differ negatively in their psychological attitude towards the emergency
and food consumption. Today, Italians are asked to engage in preventive food practices to protect
against possible chronic diseases; exploring their perceptions is important to orient them towards this change.
ª 2020 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of The Italian Diabetes Society, the Italian Society for
the Study of Atherosclerosis, the Italian Society of Human Nutrition and the Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University.
Introduction
Many governmental and institutional bodies are concerned
that the novel coronavirus (SARS-Cov-2), which caused the
respiratory disease called coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID19), is challenging people’s diets and healthy lifestyles. The
population may be at risk to develop chronic diseases,
particularly in the most hit countries like Italy [1]. Despite
the effort to share reliable information about proper
diet and lifestyle [2], people’s psychological orientation e
especially towards their health and food consumption e
seem to be neglected. Italy is entering ‘phase 2’ of disease
management, with relatively fewer restrictions, but people
are still are required to reduce movement, work from home
when possible, and practice social distancing. All these
disruptive events are changing people’s approach to food
* Corresponding author. EngageMinds HUB e Consumer, Food &
Health Engagement Research Center, Faculty of Agricultural, Food and
Environmental Sciences, Via Milano, 24, 26100, Cremona, Italy.
E-mail address: greta.castellini@unicatt.it (G. Castellini).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2020.10.013
0939-4753/ª 2020 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of The Italian Diabetes Society, the Italian Society for the Study of Atherosclerosis, the Italian Society of Human Nutrition
and the Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Federico II University.
Nutrition, Metabolism & Cardiovascular Diseases (2021) 31, 399e402
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Nutrition, Metabolism & Cardiovascular Diseases
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nmcdpurchases. Recent studies highlighted that the COVID-19
emergency had a deep psychological impact on the population, which also affected food consumption [1,3,4]. During
quarantine, it is possible that people switch from a healthy
diet to an unhealthy one, as a way to cope with stressful
events [5]. For example, people could search for more
‘comfort foods’, such as foods rich in sugar, carbohydrates or
fats [6e8]. Our country has been a stronghold of the Mediterranean diet, known to be a protective factor for chronic
disease development [9], but this is now at risk. Having a
well-functioning immune system enables humans to resist
infections [10] and prevents chronic conditions [11], as reported by very recent studies in the Italian territory [12,13].
In parallel, social scientist have investigated the impact of
the pandemic in terms of wellbeing and on mental health
[14], but not understanding the impact of this emergency
on people’s psychological orientation towards health and
food consumption. Our research is aimed at understanding
people’s attitudes about the role of food as a preventive
measure during the COVID-19 pandemic and its relation to
their health orientation, and how this may reconfigure their
immediate and future food consumptions.
Method
Research data were collected via a questionnaire of a representative sample of the Italian population with sex, age,
profession, size of the centre and geographical area extracted
by stratified sampling. The survey was conducted using a
CAWI (computer-assisted web interviewing) methodology
between 12 and 18 May 2020. The sample consisted of 1004
subjects randomly selected from the consumers’ panel
managed by Norstat srl (https://norstat.it/). In this article,
we report the first results from a wider research about the
COVID-19 disease influences on the Italians lifestyles and
orientations. We explored the differences between those
who believe that strengthening immune defences through
nutrition is important to reduce the risk of contracting
COVID-19 disease and those who believe otherwise, based on
the socio-demographic variables and a set of ad hoc items.
These two groups were created considering the answers
given to the question, ‘I think strengthening the immune
defenses through nutrition is important to reduce the risk of
COVID-19 disease contagion’. Those who declared that they
disagreed totally, disagreed, or neither agreed nor disagreed
with this affirmation (the first three points on the Likert
scale) were grouped together (Group 1, N Z 403). Those who
agreed or totally agreed with it (the last two points on the
Likert scale) also were grouped together (Group 2, N Z 601).
Ad hoc items were used to identify differences between the
two groups in health orientation (concern about COVID-19
disease emergency, information about health, health management under stress, consciousness about the importance
of health for the future); food consumption relevance,
motivation, habits and intentions to purchase (see
supplementary materials); healthy lifestyle and socioTable 1 Demographic profiles of the sample (N Z 1004).
n %
1. Gender
Male 493 49.1
Female 511 50.9
2. Age
18e24 101 10.1
25e34 163 16.3
35e44 215 21.4
45e54 228 22.7
55e59 109 10.8
60e70 188 18.7
3. Education
Elementary 3 .3
Junior high 123 12.2
Senior high 602 60.0
College or university 276 27.5
4. Geographic area
NortheWest 264 23.6
NortheEast 187 18.6
Centre 198 19.7
South and Islands 355 35.4
5. Income level (V)
Until 600 63 6.2
601e900 66 6.5
901e1200 106 10.5
1201e1500 152 15.1
1501e1800 116 11.6
1801e2500 143 14.3
2501e3500 105 10.4
More than 3501 103 10.3
Missing 150 15.0
6. Profession
Entrepreneur/freelancer 124 12.4
Manager/middle manager 38 3.8
Employee/teacher/military 193 19.2
Worker/shop assistant/apprentice 211 21.0
Housewife 151 15.0
Student 53 5.3
Retired 79 7.9
Unoccupied 155 15.4
7. Inhabited centre size
Until 10,000 inhabitants 314 31.3
10/100,000 inhabitants 443 44.1
100/500,000 inhabitants 109 10.9
More than 500,000 130 12.9
Missing 8 .8
Table 2 Frequency distribution of people's perception of nutrition
and immune defences (N Z 1004).
n % Mean (SD)
I think strengthening immune defences
through nutrition is important to
reduce the risk of COVID-19 infection
3.7 (.92)
Totally disagree (1) 23 2.2
Disagree (2) 53 5.3
Neither agree nor disagree (3) 327 32.6
Agree (4) 404 40.2
Totally agree (5) 197 19.7
400 M. Savarese et al.demographic variables. To determine the subjects’ levels
of healthy lifestyle, four items were totalled (see
supplementary materials). From these questions, an ‘index of
healthy life-style’ was created, ranging from 0 to 4, where
0 represents a low healthy lifestyle and 4 a high healthy
lifestyle. The differences between the two groups were analysed using Student’s t-test. Finally, a contingency table was
used. Pearson’s chi-square test was carried out to reject the
null hypothesis that data regarding the future consumption
of food rich in vitamins and antioxidants are randomly
distributed across the two groups. To verify this assumption,
standardized residuals were inspected (20). All analyses were
performed with IBM SPSS 20 (release 20.0.0.0).
Results
The demographic profile of the sample is presented in
detail in Table 1.
The results show that about 40% of the population
perceive that strengthening the immune defences through
nutrition is not important to reduce the risk of COVID-19
disease infection (see Table 2).
People who had lower levels of perceived importance are
significantly younger than those with higher scores (average
age 42.25 vs 45.92), but no differences are seen in other
socio-demographic variables. They are significantly less
concerned about the COVID-19 disease emergency (7.3 vs
7.7) and they do not believe this emergency will impact their
level of consciousness about the importance of health for the
future. At the same time, they have trouble managing their
health in stressful situations. Regarding food consumption
habits, they do not consider strengthening of the immune
system as a future motivation for food purchase. Consequently, in the next 6 months, they do not have the intention
to reinforce their immune system through food consumption and they have the intention to reduce the consumption
of food rich in vitamins and antioxidants (see Table 3).
Table 3 Groups' comparison on socio-demographic ad hoc variables.
Dependent variables Groups
Group 1 (N Z 403) Group 2 (N Z 601)
Age
[t(830.673) Z e4.063; p < .001; d Z .26]
42.3 (14.31) 45.9 (13.58)
Healthy lifestyle index
[t(857.043) Z e1.997; p < .050; d Z .14]
2.28 (.99) 2.41 (.98)
Concern about COVID-19 emergency
[t(1002) Z e3.112; p < .010; d Z .20]
7.27 (2.07) 7.68 (2.04)
Information about health
[t(1002) Z e5.701; p < .001; d Z .37]
3.34 (.84) 3.65 (.84)
Effective health management under stress
[t(816.421) Z e5.819; p < .001; d Z .37]
3.63 (.78) 3.91 (.73)
Level of consciousness about the importance of health for the future
[t(1002) Z e5.922; p < .001; d Z .38]
3.73 (.75) 4.03 (.82)
Nutrition as a self-expression
[t(1002) Z e6.869; p < .001; d Z .49]
4.63 (1.12) 5.19 (1.19)
Purchase of food supplements in the last month
[t(987) Z e3.283; p < .010; d Z .22]
2.53 (1.37) 2.83 (1.44)
Strengthen of the immune system as motivation for food purchase
in the next 6 months
[t(1002) Z e10.986; p < .001; d Z .72]
4.57 (1.14) 5.39 (1.15)
Intention to strengthen the immune system through food consumption
in the next 6 months
[t(1002) Z e13.497; p < .001; d Z .88]
3.30 (.84) 4.03 (.82)
Intention to buy food rich in vitamins and antioxidants in the next 6 months
Chi-square Z 12.961 (df Z 2), p < .010
Group 1 (N Z 403) Group 2 (N Z 601)
Will decrease Counting 11 4
% of column 3.3% .8%
Std res. 2.1 1.7
Will remain stable Counting 274 397
% of column 82.0% 77.5%
Std res. .6 e.5
Will increase Counting 49 111
% of column 14.7% 21.7%
Std res. 1.8 1.4
Note: (1) values in cells are means; (2) Standard errors are reported in brackets; (3) d Z Cohen's d; (4) cells with an absolute value of std. res >2
are marked in bold; (5) Std res Z standard residues; (6) df Z degrees of freedom.
COVID-19 disease and nutritional choices 401Discussion
Since 4 May, Italy is in ‘phase 2’ of COVID-19 disease
management. Now more than ever, people are asked to
contribute to getting the emergency under control and
preventing possible diseases, including through food consumption. Recent data suggest that in Italy, the risk of food
misconduct during this quarantine is high [13]. Our results
suggest that almost half of the Italian population does not
perceive that strengthening the immune system through
food consumption could help them limit COVID-19’s disease
contagion. Among these, those who attribute less importance to food as prevention differ in terms of their psychological attitude towards health and food, which seems
to represent a different approach to food consumption.
Covid-19 and relative fallouts seem to have polarized people’s psychological attitudes towards health and influenced
their food selection, potentially increasing the risk for food
misconduct. Studies in the psychological field highlighted
how this pandemic has been particularly stressful and
traumatic for the Italian population, and how e on the other
hand e it could be the beginning of a deep reconfiguration
of daily habits and food practices [7,8]. It is important to
understand people’s psychological orientation in order to
find the right levers to guide them through positive
changes. Recent studies in the Italian context have discussed that people in stressful or emotionally overwhelming situations can be keener to consume unhealthy
food [1,3,7]. Also, in our study, people who are less likely to
consider food as a way to prevent the COVID-19 disease
contagion appear more overwhelmed by the emergency in
managing their health. In addition, the spread of much e
and sometimes confusing e information about the role of
nutrition (i.e. vitamins D or C intake) [15,16] in disease
prevention could have exacerbated the general disorientation about food choices, as also suggested by others [6,17].
The study has limitations: it was conducted through the
CAWI method, which was the only possible way to collect
data with a representative and large sample during lockdown. Nevertheless, through this method, higher educated
and unemployed people are slightly overrepresented.
Understanding psychological reactions [18] to food
consumption may assist experts and policy makers to
orient communication and educational campaigns that
aim to disseminate effective and correct information, to
strengthen individuals’ positive motivation towards
healthy food consumption and to change their at-risk food
behaviours for the sake of disease prevention.
Funding
The data panel was funded by CRAFT (Cremona Agri-Food
Technologies financed by Fondazione Cariplo and Regione
Lombardia), ID number 2018/2757.
Declaration of competing interest
None.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2020.10.013.



NEW PAPER



ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 16 April 2021
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.625756
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 1 April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 625756
Edited by:
Lydia Gimenez-Llort,
Autonomous University of
Barcelona, Spain
Reviewed by:
Steven Kator Iorfa,
University of Nigeria, Nigeria
Rotimi Oguntayo,
University of Ilorin, Nigeria
Samson Olowo Kolawole,
Nigeria Police Academy, Nigeria
Andrzej Jarynowski,
Jagiellonian University, Poland
*Correspondence:
Ines Testoni
ines.testoni@unipd.it
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Public Mental Health,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Public Health
Received: 03 November 2020
Accepted: 19 March 2021
Published: 16 April 2021
Citation:
Testoni I, Iacona E, Corso C,
Pompele S, Dal Corso L, Orkibi H and
Wieser MA (2021) Psychology
Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19 in
a Death Education Course.
Front. Public Health 9:625756.
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2021.625756
Psychology Students’ Perceptions of
COVID-19 in a Death Education
Course
Ines Testoni 1,2
*, Erika Iacona1
, Cecilia Corso1
, Sara Pompele1
, Laura Dal Corso1
,
Hod Orkibi 2 and Michael Alexander Wieser 3
1 Department of Philosophy, Sociology, Education and Applied Psychology (FISPPA), University of Padova, Padova, Italy,
2 Emili Sagol Creative Arts Therapies Research Center, Faculty of Social Welfare and Health Sciences, University of Haifa,
Haifa, Israel, 3 Department of Psychology, University of Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, Austria
The systematic removal of death from social life in the West has exposed people living
in areas affected by COVID-19 to the risk of being unable to adequately manage the
anxiety caused by mortality salience. Death education is a type of intervention that helps
people manage their fear of death by offering them effective strategies to deal with loss
and anxiety. To that end, a path of death education has been carried out with University
students of psychology. The main purpose of the research is to understand how students
who participated in the death education course perceive the lockdown experience in light
of course teachings. The research was carried out at a University in northern Italy in an
area severely affected by COVID-19, during the first year of the pandemic. The group of
participants included 38 students, 30 women and 8 men, with an average age of 25.45
years (SD = 7). At the end of the course, the students could respond on an optional basis
to the request to comment on the training experience according to what they experienced
during the pandemic. A thematic analysis was subsequently carried out on the texts,
which made it possible to identify the most relevant thematic areas for the students. The
qualitative analyses permitted recognition of three main forms of discovery: the removal
of death in contemporary culture; the importance of community, ritual and funeral, and
spirituality; and the significance of death education for future health professionals. The
texts have highlighted how the removal of these issues exposes people to the risk of
being unable to handle extremely painful events such as those related to dying. The
results show the positivity of death education pathways conducted at the University level
to help students reflect on these issues and manage the related anguish.
Keywords: COVID-19, death, death education, psychology students, lockdown experience
INTRODUCTION
During the early months of 2020, the Italian health system was forced to grapple with the recent
pandemic caused by the spread of COVID-19 and the subsequent sudden increase in death rates,
which constituted a huge, and, at least in the last decades, unprecedented, public health concern,
and challenge. The national health emergency significantly affected life and work, and the restrictive
solutions negatively influenced almost all social sectors, including those of the educative area
(primary and secondary school, and universities).Testoni et al. Psychology Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19
A theory that could help understand the significant negative
psychological impact of COVID-19 on society is terror
management theory (TMT), which states how the constant
conflict between survival instinct and the awareness that
everyone must die sooner or later (called mortality salience)
causes intense cognitive dissonance and sufferance to people,
who therefore constantly attempt to reduce mortality salience
itself (1). Terror management theory focuses therefore on the
crucial role death awareness plays in human life. Over the past
35 years, hundreds of empirical studies have confirmed how
diverse aspects of human behavior are directly influenced by
this, showing the role of proximal defenses, which are cultural
constructions that enable people to think of themselves as
valuable contributors to a meaningful, significant, and permanent
universe, and distal defenses, which help individuals to give sense
to the relationships between life and death (2).
It is therefore understandable how in a period such as the
present one, with a world pandemic of highly contagious nature
that is causing an enormous death toll, how mortality salience
could become almost impossible to hide, and how the virus plays
very important roles in spawning anxiety that could result in
critical behaviors and situations. From the TMT point of view,
therefore, mortality salience caused by the pandemic plays a
central role in driving the attitudes and behaviors of most of the
population in each country plagued by the virus (3–5).
The systematic removal of the reflection on death and dying
that has particularly characterized Western culture in recent
decades (6) has left individuals unprepared in the face of the
massive amount of news that activates the mortality salience
in the pandemic period. In recent years some death education
pathways have been developed to help people, especially
adolescents, to acquire familiarity with the idea of death, feeling
free to discuss it with peers and expressing the related feelings and
thoughts, especially through the mean of the arts, which allow
them to be as free as possible in their elaboration of the concept
of death and dying (7). For example, an approach that is proving
to be extremely useful is psychodrama, through which people,
usually divided in groups, have the possibility to represent and
give life to both past experiences and personal fears or fantasies
through the mean of dramatic enactment and which is easy to
implement with adolescents in a context of death education,
during which they can live again and possibly change, in the
protected psychodramatic stage, past griefs, or even represent
their personal idea of death, and share it with the rest of the
group, discussing it together (8). A very common psychodramatic
techniques applied to death education is for example the “empty
chair,” in which participants are sitting in front of a physical
empty chair on which they imagine a deceased loved person or
even death itself as a personified character is sitting, thus allowing
them to elaborate their feelings and thoughts concerning the
theme of dying in a dialog with the person/entity on the
empty chair (7).
Another methodology that has proven to be very useful
in death education courses with groups of adolescents is for
example photovoice, in which they are asked to produce pictures
concerning the theme of death and dying and how they
personally perceive and represent it, and later show them to their
group and discuss them with the others (9). These experiences
seem to have demonstrated that consciously managing the
issue of death and the negative feelings associated with it can
indeed strengthen people’s resilience and allow them to feel
less frightened by it (7, 10). Death education aims therefore
to promote dialogue and reflection on issues that are usually
removed from daily dialogue because they prompt anxiety and
sadness (11). The greater awareness of the terror of death and
the resulting defensive dynamics help people face the difficulties
that arise from mortal situations and help others relate to people
who are suffering from a personal loss (12). Moreover, literature
has also shown that reflecting on death and human vulnerability
can also help to reduce anxiety and to better manage information
related to the preservation of one’s health (13). For example,
a qualitative study of community death education in which
participants were offered a death education course and were
later asked to imagine they were affected by Amyotrophic Lateral
Sclerosis (ALS) and had to prepare their Advanced Treatment
Directives (ATDs) highlighted how reflecting upon the themes
of the knowledge of having to die, palliative care and ATDs
significantly helped participants to think to their death in a less
distressful way and to be able to plan their future healthcare
treatments and fundamental desires with less anxiety (14). Death
education has moreover been demonstrated to be useful also to
help prevent other significant public health concerns, such as for
example the issue of suicide risk, especially among adolescents
(15) and the likeliness of smoking (16).
The strength of these paths lies in the reflection on
transcendence and spirituality, which find in distal defenses their
power to reduce anxiety and fear (7).
It is reasonable to believe therefore that death education
courses could indeed provide an important support also in
dealing with the current pandemic situation, the present most
significant and dangerous worldly public health crisis.
As stated in The Lancet (2020): “A pandemic is a cause
and powerful amplifier of suffering, through physical illness and
death, through stresses and anxieties, and through financial and
social instability. Alleviation of that suffering, in all its forms,
needs to be a key part of the response” (17). Such an extreme
negative impact the COVID-19 pandemic has and the mortality
salience it elicits, imply that the contrast to the pandemic is
also carried out with initiatives of consciousness-raising that
make people aware of their psychological frailty in facing death.
These further undesirable effects worsen the state of psychosocial
distress caused by the virus. Recent studies show the usefulness of
conducting death education courses with children, adolescents,
and University students. If conducted properly, it is possible to
manage in a positive way the effects of the path of reflection
on death, on the fears it arouses, and on the effects (9, 15, 18).
Therefore, it could help in critical periods of the pandemic to
set up special paths of death education that support students
in becoming aware of what happens and their experiences in
this regard (19).
In Italy, Law 38/2010 on “Provisions to ensure access to
palliative care and pain therapy” (8, 20) has included in all
University courses of medicine, nursing, psychology, and social
services that must address the issue of death to enable future
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 2 April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 625756Testoni et al. Psychology Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19
health professionals to acquire basic skills related to palliative
care (8). In one of these courses held during the first phase
of the pandemic in Italy, in one of the geographical areas
most severely affected by the infection, the psychological effect
of the COVID-19 experience was explicitly addressed. This
intervention coincided with the lockdown period imposed by the
Italian government since March 2020 (21), and for this reason
the lessons were held at a distance. The literature on educational
pathways during COVID-19 focused especially on internal and
external changes in the formative paths that institutes, teachers,
and professors had to make to rapidly adjust their modes of
teaching (22, 23). Since there is not yet much literature on specific
death education activities useful to manage anxiety and fear
of death, this study presents the results of a qualitative survey
with students who participated in a course for palliative care
where they could face their emotions and feelings related to
the pandemic.
The course was realized with undergraduate psychology
students at a University in northern Italy, where the pandemic
effects were particularly severe, and it focused on palliative care,
including death education issues with particular attention paid to
the current COVID-19 pandemic.
The present research, instead, aimed to understand how the
students who took part in the teaching experienced the lockdown
period in light of the preparation that the course provided them.
We wanted to investigate how dealing with death education
issues influenced the way the participants lived and perceived
quarantine and the constant mortality salience caused by the
daily information. In particular, we tried to recognize and outline
the students’ personal feelings with respect to the death education
course and its effect, extrapolating the fundamental pivots on
which they anchored the capability to think of and talk about
issues relating to death and dying as proposed in the course.
METHODS
Participants
The research involved 38 students, 30 women and 8 men. The
average age was about 25.45 years (SD = 7). The participants were
all psychology graduates who were pursuing master’s degrees
in psychology. In order to recruit them, researchers presented
the study protocol and aims in detail during one of the first
online lessons of the palliative care and death education course.
During the occasion, all the necessary information concerning
the protection of participants’ personal data and confidentiality,
as well as concerning the possibility to choose freely whether
to complete the research procedure or withdraw from it at any
time without having to give any explanation for it and without
risking any penalty of any kind, were given too, and students
were encouraged to ask all the questions they needed. The
researchers also made clear that taking or not taking part in
the study would not have affected in any way students’ final
score on the exam at the end of the course, in order to ensure
that the participants’ motivation for joining the study was of
simply curiosity and desire to aid psychological research and not
linked to fear of repercussions, if they chose not to participate, or
rather the need to obtain some benefits if they did take part in
the research. The fact that their answers would have been used
anonymously for the research results was also specified, in order
to prevent as much as possible any form of social desirability in
their given answers. All this information were repeated to those
who actually decided to participate and presented in a written
informed consent they were asked to sign before starting with the
concrete study procedure.
The research followed the APA Ethical Principles of
Psychologists and Code of Conduct and the principles of the
Declaration of Helsinki, and approval was obtained from the
Padua University Ethics Committee for Experimentation (n.
57BC2002FDF5CBD4292F5F86AA077F23). The names reported
below are fictious. When necessary, the quotation has been
camouflaged to avoid revealing a participant’s identity.
Data Collection
This study followed a qualitative research design (24) within
the grounded method (25), considered in the literature to
constitute the most reliable methodology for investigating issues
pertaining to health problems that are not yet considered
(26). This methodology can also generate reflections to a
much greater extent than the classical technique of direct
interview or questionnaire (27).
Participants, as has been previously mentioned, attended
a death education course which focused on palliative care,
including death education issues with particular attention paid
to the current COVID-19 pandemic. It was structured in frontal
lectures delivered in telematic mode through video lectures and
in group work. In addition, interventions were proposed by
experts in the field and peer group work to allow students
to better understand some nodes related to the psychological
effects of the death experience and to allow them to confront
each other. The aim of the course was to provide knowledge
to acquire awareness about the management of terror of death
and dying, loss, grief, and mourning, considering such themes
from different points of view and involving psychological but also
sociological, philosophical, and religious aspects and theories.
The course, which is implemented every year for psychology
students, usually also dedicates some time to the related themes
of euthanasia, assisted suicide, and related bioethical issues, and
to the aspect of psychological and medical support to the elders.
However, because of the intense impact COVID-19 and the
perceived urgent need students had to reflect upon the pandemic
psychological and social implications, in the current version of
the course these themes, even though fundamental, inevitably
had to take second place, and were therefore less considered and
discussed with students. With respect instead to the management
of the COVID-19 experience, the main objectives of the course
were: becoming aware of the forms through which death anxiety
characterizes human suffering; knowing and understanding how
terror of death influences human behavior; and considering the
current situation in light of the death studies discussed.
Approximately 3 weeks after completion of the course, which
was considered the proper amount of time to allow them to
elaborate the personal experience lived during the course itself,
participants were asked to write an essay concerning what they
had understood about their experience of the pandemic and
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 3 April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 625756Testoni et al. Psychology Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19
their awareness with respect to the effect of the widespread
and increasing mortality salience. The specific setting for the
procedure was represented by each participants’ home, since at
the time of the implementation of the research, right after the
course, universities were still closed, and only online lessons were
allowed, to comply with the COVID-19 regulations on social
distancing. The participants were given an hour and a half to
complete the assignment, and they were asked to send the written
reports to the researchers through their e-mail.
Data Analysis
The written texts obtained constituted the material for the
qualitative research. The corpora obtained by the students’
texts were analyzed following rigorously thematic analysis
steps: reading, tracing the units of meaning, examining the
redundancies and differences, reflecting on the units of meaning
to extrapolate the theme being transformed into scientific
language, and finally, formulating a consistent description of
personal experiences (28, 29). The study identified the most
salient thematic areas that the students involved had highlighted
with their responses, through the recognition of the most relevant
categories that facilitated a detailed conceptual analysis of their
perspective (30). The paper-and-pencil analysis operations were
then integrated using the computer program qualitative analysis
software Atlas.ti, which has been precisely designed to aid
researchers in qualitative data interpretation, allowing an analysis
that is as objective as possible. Moreover, in order to ensure the
findings would have been interpreted in an unbiased way, two
of the authors have independently and simultaneously proceeded
with the data analysis, and they have subsequently compared each
other results, in order to check the eventual presence of high
discrepancies between each other findings and to understand why
this could have happened. In this study specific case however,
no peculiar discrepancies have emerged and both researchers
reached very similar conclusions.
RESULTS
Thirty-eight texts were collected for a total corpus of 16,454
words. The texts average 433 words each. A thematic analysis
was conducted to highlight the thematic areas present in the
corpus. Three main thematic areas have been identified: 1—
Removal of death in contemporary culture; 2—The Importance
of Community, Ritual and Funeral, and Spirituality; 3—The
Significance of Death Education for Future Health Professionals.
Concerning the first thematic area, “Removal of death in
contemporary culture,” some of the fundamental elements that
have emerged are:
— Students becoming aware of the social strategies that
characterize the removal of death from the consciousness of
everyday life;
— The importance of reflecting on fundamental existential
themes, which in turn developed into the importance of
acquiring broader categories of thought and a suitable
language to give meaning to life and the pain of loss.
Concerning the second thematic area, “The importance of
Community, Ritual and Funeral, and Spirituality,” the main
themes that have emerged are:
— Understanding the suffering of those who had to deal with the
loss of a loved one during the pandemic without being able to
accompany him or her and without being able to celebrate an
appropriate funeral ritual;
— Reflection on the importance of the spiritual dimension,
regardless of personal attitudes toward religion;
— The need for closeness with others and sharing the negative
feelings caused by the pandemic.
Lastly, concerning the third thematic area, “The Significance
of Death Education for Future Health Professionals,” the
fundamental elements that have emerged are:
— Acquisition of awareness and personal reflection, especially
concerning the recognition and control of the negative
emotions that occur in situations related to death;
— Better management of the social trauma caused by COVID-19
thanks of the Death Education course;
— The possibility to refocus on life instead of the fear of death;
— Recognition of the need for adequate preparation regarding
the topics covered by the course.
In order to visually summarize the present fundamental
thematic areas and their main sub-themes, a figure (Figure 1) has
been created that illustrates the results findings. In the following
section of the manuscript, each thematic area will be presented
in depth, and quotations from the very narrations offered by
participants will be presented.
First Prevalent Thematic Area: Removal of
Death in Contemporary Culture
More than half of the participants acknowledged that they had
reflected for the first time on the fact that death is a real cultural
taboo, that it is not at all a socially accepted topic that can be freely
spoken about. Valeria (28 years old) expressed for example how
during the period of the pandemic, according to her, people have
been forced to deal with the concept of human vulnerability and
death, on a daily basis: “Suddenly, during the course, I became
aware of how I had never had the chance to reflect on the meaning
of death and how I could never talk about it with anyone. During
the lockdown, instead, we were all forced to reckon with this
censorship, because suddenly there was no other talk about it
in the media, but of course everything always referred only to
COVID-19. We all realized that we were absolutely unprepared
for this sudden forwarding of messages related to death and this
inevitably distressed us. I for one always believed that there was
no point in thinking about death [. . . ].” Unlike Valeria, who
expressed how before the course she had never really thought
about death, Sofia (23 years old), for example reported instead
she had already felt the desire to explore the theme in her life,
even though it also scared her, but that was never possible and
she did not know how to face this: “When I was a child and
a teenager, I often felt the need to talk about it, to confront it,
to tell my family how terrified I was at the idea that something
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 4 April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 625756Testoni et al. Psychology Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19
FIGURE 1 | Flowchart describing the phases of the study.
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 5 April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 625756Testoni et al. Psychology Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19
might happen to them. But it has never been possible to address
this issue. I wondered what meaning life would have had if
my parents had died, [. . . ]. I wondered what the relationship
between the meaning of life and the attachment I felt for my loved
ones was.”
Federico (32 years old), also expressed how the context of the
pandemic made his fear of losing his parents and to die himself,
even stronger, and how the course on the contrary helped him
find a way to deal with this fear: “I was very scared of losing
my parents and of dying myself too, however the course helped
me, especially analyzing other people’s different representations
of death, discussing about annihilation and nothingness and
especially the thought of the Italian philosopher Severino.”
Alessandra (28 years old) reported as well how the pandemic
has allowed her to realize how much of a taboo the theme of
death is still considered: “I was surprised to realize that we
live in a delusional delirium that makes us believe that we
can avoid considering arguments concerning death in everyday
life. I suddenly realized that we procrastinate the moment of
encountering this topic for so long, that when it is necessary to
deal with it we are unprepared. This is exactly what is happening
now, that we are forced to deal with the anguish of death without
having tools.”
As evidence of what Alessandra said, Gioele (23 years old)
tested in his real life the fact that people avoid talking about death
and dying: “It was useful and interesting because within my group
of friends, now that we have had the opportunity to meet again,
we have dealt with the topic of Covid and the topic of death and
I was able to feel the block we have also from a practical point of
view. When we have to talk about death.”
Similarly, Giulia (23 years old), expressed as well how the
course helped her understand the importance of actively talking
about death: “Understanding the importance of talking about
death has given me the opportunity to experience firsthand how
beneficial a constructive dialogue on death and fear of death
can be. Perhaps the current pandemic could be managed in a
different, less distressing way.” Ivan (25 years old) recognized
too the help given by the course, and referred it directly to his
personal experience, saying: “I also noticed the decrease in my
tendency to change the subject when someone communicated
to me a grieving situation.” In line with these considerations,
Roberta (23 years old) concluded by saying that she hoped the
experience of the pandemic would not lead to a new community
removal of the concept of dying: “now the important thing to
do is to make sure that compared to this terrible experience of
the COVID-19 there is no sort of mass social removal. It would
be important to find a way to process it in a meaningful way.
Indeed, I have suddenly understood that it is not with the removal
and avoidance of themes that remind us of our finitude, that our
impact on death is avoided.”
Rosa (31 years old), reported a thought very similar to
Roberta’s one, by saying that what the course really left her was
the awareness that death is actually part of life, it is natural,
and should not therefore be demonized or avoided as a theme:
“I believe this is what I understood thanks to this course that I
attended exactly during the pandemic: the awareness that death
is a part of life, that it can happen even though we do not expect it,
and that we should learn to face it serenely and to accept it, even
though fearing it is unfortunately part of the social and cultural
background we live in.”
Similarly, Alberto (24 years old) reflected on our society and
how difficult it is for it to relate with the theme of death: “This
path, through the pandemic, has allowed me to reflect on the
relationship between death and Western society, on how our
society is not very accustomed and not very close to what is
most intimate and natural the human being possesses, that is the
awareness of our own finitude.”
A slightly different point of view on the issue was brought
by Alice (24 years old), who instead considered the professional
aspect and the importance to be able to manage, as a healthcare
professional, the theme of death with patients without feeling
overwhelmed: “I realized the importance of beginning to speak
honestly about death, how much confusion there is around these
issues, both in terms of unconscious beliefs and representations,
and in terms of misinformation. It is even clearer to me the
importance of good information, especially if you work with
those who are sick, with those who are ill.”
Second Prevalent Thematic Area: The
Importance of Community, Ritual and
Funeral, and Spirituality
Significantly linked with the first thematic area, the second one
highlighted a further discovery, that is, the importance of the
accompanying rite and funeral of those who die and of the
community. Indeed, the very condition of constant social and
cultural removal of death and its devastating effects during a
period of high mortality salience as the pandemic one brought
participants to acknowledge the vital psychological and social
function funeral rites possess, since they help mourners to feel
embraced by their community and better elaborate their grief.
This was expressed by many participants, for example by Luisa
(26 years old): “I thought about those who were sick in the
hospital. I felt a great relief in being able to share my fear with
others, through the internet, and this allowed me to feel less
alone.” Similarly, Maria, a woman of 65 years old, the only
participant who had a significantly different age from the rest
of the group, highlighted how during the lockdown she felt it
was fundamental for her to be resilient and maintain a contact,
even though not physical, with her loved ones, and how the
course helped her realize how fundamental social relationships
are and how important it is to share feelings and fears with others
especially in such periods of global crisis: “I especially felt I had
to nurture my resilience in that moment by regularly having
telephone and on-line contacts with my friends and relatives
since I felt I could share the same experience with them. And
preparing this exam has helped me in this purpose, I could
take care of my loved ones even though at a distance, have
authentic and supportive relationships, give voice to my fears and
share them.”
Giada (23 years old) proceeded in this direction as well and
specified she felt the need to live even more intensely when
she thought about those who were left alone to suffer: “During
this lockdown, I committed myself to live more intensely the
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 6 April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 625756Testoni et al. Psychology Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19
relationship with my parents, to grow together. I looked for more
moments in which we could communicate, and I thought about
those who had to live the suffering alone.” Costanza (23 years
old) expressed the same thoughts as well: “Thinking about those
who die in the hospital alone, I understood how important it
is for a community that pays attention to the pain caused by
death. A community is truly such if it never makes you feel
alone and creates a network of support and sharing ready to help
and support you in your time of need. I had never considered
this important aspect of social life before.” Monica (23 years
old) highlighted the importance of a support network as well
especially in such a delicate phase as that of the end of life:
“Communication and sharing on a collective and community
level of suffering are the key to improve grief processing and
support people who have and are suffering now. I didn’t think
about this before.”
These considerations on the importance of sharing and
emotional support led some participants to also consider the
fundamental role psychological help can have in painful and
complex situations as the present one. Luca (23 years old), for
example, said: “I have therefore realized how important is the
profession that I hope to be able to perform in the psychological
field, I thought about the support that can be given and how
fundamental it is to receive it especially in situations like the
one we are living.” Agreeing with him, Lucia (23 years old) said:
“Before this course, I had never grasped the positive aspect of
being able to be next to a dying person. [. . . ] Before, I had never
thought about the importance of the human aspect of health care
work. [. . . ] Instead, understanding this, relationships become
essential tools.”
According to the participants, the importance of relationships
is more evident in moments of difficulty, such as the pandemic,
and the support of the community becomes crucial in the
moment of mourning when its members gather around the
mourners, as Costanza said: “I was struck by the difference
between grief and mourning and the passage from the first to
the second, thanks to the funeral rite and the closeness of the
community. I understood that they are fundamental elements
that, if they are missing, important problems can arise. For this
reason, I believe that we should support those who have seen their
loved ones go in an ambulance to the hospital and have not seen
them come back.”
But the funeral ritual is not meant to help only the suffering
people to mourn. Vanessa (24 years old) commented on the
function of the funeral from the point of view of collective
support as well: “Thanks to this course, I understood the
importance of the funeral ritual and the closeness and support
of the community at that time to the mourners. I had never
asked myself the question, or rather, it seemed unimportant.
Now I finally understood the importance and meaning of this
celebration, even though I am not a believer.” Agreeing with her,
Lorenzo (24 years old) said “I think that the course has helped me
above all to give words to something that I already only sensed,
that is the value of the rituality of death. Seeing how this had
been made impossible by the rules on social distancing, and the
anguish, dismay and anger that this caused in the population was
like re-meaning the value of this experience.”
Lastly on this thematic area, Roberta also highlighted another
fundamental aspect, that is, the difference between religiosity and
spirituality, which in turn allowed her to feel freer to explore
the latter in her personal dimension: “Understanding that the
spiritual dimension is different from religiosity and what revolves
around religion has finally allowed me to open a dialogue with
myself to reflect deeply on the coordinates of life. Being able to
do this now, in this time of pandemic was important to me.”
Third Prevalent Thematic Area: The
Significance of Death Education for Future
Health Professionals
The awareness of having to realistically reckon with the limit
and in particular with the limit of life, put in the foreground
by the pandemic, as well as the paralyzing lack of proper
rites to support mourners in those moments, allowed the
participants to also recognize in turn the positive aspects of
sharing thoughts, opinions, and feelings within educational paths
that allow to place death in a historical-cultural context, especially
in moments of extreme uncertainly as the present COVID-19-
related one. Participants indeed expressed that they believed
proper death education paths could represent a valuable tool to
strengthen people’s psychological resources and help them face
these complex situations. For example, according to Alberto:
“Looking at death by tracing a historical, symbolic-cultural and
scientific-psychological path has allowed me to acquire a greater
awareness and a greater critical sense about the events that,
especially during the acute phase of the pandemic, congested our
windows and the media.” More specifically, the course of death
education has helped some participants to better understand
and formulate their own way of understanding death, as for
example Chiara (23 years old) expressed: “The study of themes
related to death and dying has given me the opportunity to better
understand how death has been understood during the various
eras and in this way to become more aware of how I understand
death, what value I attribute to it, giving me the opportunity to
reflect on how I relate to the idea of death, especially sudden
death. It seems to me that this helps me to better manage what we
are living.” Valeria seemed to echo: “This course has given me the
tools to overcome that step of anguish that makes death fearful
and unthinkable and has taught me to look at the theme in its
entirety, without taking anything for granted.”
Relating to this, Luigi (24 years old) expressed as well how the
course helped him understand the pandemic situation and live it
with more maturity: “I do not know if I am more serene than it
would normally have been, but certainly opening my eyes from
a scientific point of view on the topics covered in the course was
the basis for reading this situation with maturity and awareness.”
According to Lucia, during the course she was finally able to
face the fear to talk about death she had always had: “Precisely in
this period, I have given shape to this fear of talking about death,
I was able to understand its origin and the great shortcomings
that there are in our society.” According to the participants,
being able to understand topics of this magnitude allows us
to treat them from a more objective point of view and with
less emotional involvement, as for example Elisa (23 years old)
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 7 April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 625756Testoni et al. Psychology Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19
explained: “What helped me most was hearing about death with
a critical eye and a scholar helped me to make the topic more
normal and more treatable. This fact has allowed me to distance
myself from the fear that death inevitably implies.” The positivity
of the course was also linked to the fact that it allowed to focus
on life and to recognize the importance it deserves. Dealing with
these issues, as Manuela (23 years old) said, makes it possible
“to give more relevance to the meaning and significance of lived
existence rather than the fear of the finitude of life,” while in a very
similar way Federica (27 years old) expressed herself: “Talking
about death gives meaning to life, makes you feel more alive.
This course has allowed me to face the lockdown by valuing
every moment.”
DISCUSSION
The present study, which has been summarized from its
elaboration to its main results in Figure 2, aimed to explore
psychology students’ experiences and perspectives concerning
the present COVID-19-related mortality salience situation and
especially lockdown measures, in light of the death education
course they attended. Concerning the theme of death and the
end-of-life, international studies have indeed already highlighted
how other healthcare students, especially medical and nursing
ones, report not to feel adequately prepared to face these issues
and support a dying patient, and how the intense need for
proper death education and palliative care trainings is indeed still
extremely high (31, 32).
The current COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated this
critical issue, causing intense feelings of uncertainty and high
distress among healthcare students, who had to face, generally
unprepared, an unprecedented sanitary crisis with extremely
high deathrates (33, 34).
The present research findings have highlighted these critical
aspects as well in relation to psychology students, concerning
whom less studies have been conducted, who had to live and
learn in the COVID-19 period, and who had to deal with a
related abrupt increase in mortality salience, while attending a
death education course. From the obtained results, three main
forms of discovering that characterized students’ feeling, and
learning have emerged: first, the discovering of the removal of
death in contemporary culture; second, of the importance of
community, of rituals, and of funeral, but also of spirituality;
and third, of the significance of the death education for future
health professionals.
With respect to the first thematic area, the most important
feeling students experienced was to become aware of the social
strategies that characterize the removal of death from the
consciousness of everyday life, realizing how this has led to a
general inability to deal with the shocking experience of the
pandemic. This paralyzing lack of adequate skills related to
death and the end-of-life, exacerbated, and made even more
evident by the pandemic, has already been reported by other
healthcare students’ as well in literature, especially undergraduate
nurses and doctors, as has already been highlighted, who have
reported how overwhelmingly unprepared they felt concerning
the present sanitary emergency (35, 36). We think that the study
of the TMT contents helped participants to develop a broader
perspective of this problem (4). Some students also reported
personal experiences, very specific ones that we omitted in this
report, because they could make the participants recognizable.
These testimonies described important losses and unanswered
requests and needs for support. Supporting literature addressed
the importance of reflecting on fundamental existential themes
for healthcare students in order to acquire broader categories of
thought and a suitable language to give meaning to life and the
pain of loss and acquire the adequate professional skills to be able
to deal with these themes in their future job (37).
The second thematic area highlighted a further discovery,
significantly related to the first one, that is, the importance of
the accompanying rites of those who die and funerals. This
has made it possible to pay attention to and understand the
suffering of those who had to deal with the loss of a loved
one during the pandemic without being able to accompany
him or her and without being able to celebrate an appropriate
funeral ritual, and this is in line with other literature findings,
which have highlighted how healthcare professionals, students,
and trainees in general felt the painful burden of having to
assist and support patients who were indeed dying alone and
to support family members who could not properly accompany
and later mourn their loved one (38, 39). In this scenario,
reflection on the spiritual dimension took shape, until then
underestimated. All this has been linked by students to their
need for closeness with others and sharing the negative feelings
caused by the pandemic, since forced isolation made them feel
isolated in the moment of most intense fear. Therefore, they
identified themselves with those who in hospitals could not
be in contact with their loved ones. The course has therefore
allowed students to discover the importance of the funeral rite
and spirituality, allowing some to reconnect and explore their
inner dimension regardless of their attitude toward religion
(9). Other studies in literature have indeed highlighted how
essential healthcare students believe receiving proper training
also concerning spiritual aspects in patients’ care is, and on the
contrary the current lack of information and reflection upon
these themes in healthcare University courses (40–42).
Lastly, the last thematic area concerned indeed the importance
of death education courses for University students who will
pursue careers in healthcare in the future. The issues that
comprised this theme were the acquisition of awareness and
personal reflection that allow recognition and control of the
negative emotions that death and dying arouse; consequently,
they also allow people to focus attention on life. Through the
dissolution of taboos related to these topics, they have become
aware and learned to recognize the negative emotions that
occur in situations related to death. Finally, the positivity of the
course was substantially derived from its focus on life and on
the recognition of its importance. In general, all participants
recognized the need for adequate preparation regarding the
topics covered by the course, not only to live better and deal
with these issues more serenely, but also for their future as health
professionals. All participants therefore expressed only positive
psychological and educational effects, valuing how much the
course had allowed them to better manage the social trauma
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 8 April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 625756Testoni et al. Psychology Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19
FIGURE 2 | Findings of qualitative data analysis. Main themes and their relationships.
caused by COVID-19, and this appears to be in line with other
literature, and especially studies involving also other healthcare
students as well, which have confirmed how important it is to
implement death education pathways for University students,
especially for those studying to become health professionals
(43, 44), as the present results highlighted as well.
CONCLUSIONS
The present study highlighted how the death education course,
conducted during the first phase of the COVID-19 pandemic in
Italy, helped students become more aware of the issues addressed
through contents and dialogues that encouraged participants to
develop their own critical thinking. It allowed them to rediscover
the value of reflection on the sense of limit, finitude of life, and
the different representations of death. Since these meanings are
usually taken for granted despite a general lack of awareness
about the representations of death, the possibility to freely reflect
upon and discuss these issues offered by the course rendered
it therefore a significant tool to support participants during
the confusing and highly dramatic period of the pandemic.
Related to this, the research results showed also that the course
helped participants consider the religious and spiritual aspect
corresponding to the distal defenses indicated by TMT (4).
Indeed, in line with the TMT perspective, religious and spiritual
vision mitigates the concerns that arise from the awareness of
death and allows people to focus their attention on everyday life
without being assailed by death anxiety. Another fundamental
element that has emerged from the research has been the
rediscovered importance of funeral rites and to maintain a sense
of community especially while facing extremely painful historical
periods significantly characterized by grief. The study highlighted
indeed a concrete need to address these problems and to link
them to wider existential issues, such as the ability to improve
reflection on the meaning of life and address the sense of limit.
These results confirm once again the effectiveness of reflection
on death and dying in critical periods, such as the COVID-19
pandemic, because it permits awareness of unconscious aspects
that characterize the terror of death and gives them cultural and
relative dimensions. This is especially important for healthcare
professionals, who already find it generally difficult and rather
distressing to manage the end of life of a patient due to lack
of proper training on these aspects, and who therefore have
to face, in this pandemic period, the additional psychological
burden of dealing with even higher mortality salience and lack of
proper personal and professional tools to elaborate it and break
the silence and taboo that generally surrounds the experience of
death, even for them. Considering this, the COVID-19 pandemic,
its extremely high number of deaths and their massive burden for
healthcare professionals who actively deal with them on a daily
basis, represent a significant public health challenge to which
more and more attention should be given in the near future.
Given the current study findings therefore, the introduction
and increase of death education pathways in University courses
could be of great importance especially in the present situation
Frontiers in Public Health | www.frontiersin.org 9 April 2021 | Volume 9 | Article 625756Testoni et al. Psychology Students’ Perceptions of COVID-19
of COVID-19 pandemic. They could indeed help young adults
obtain the proper resources and personal skills they need to
adequately face this period of intense uncertainty and mortality
salience, and any other future challenge there might be in store,
especially for healthcare students like psychologists for example,
who will need to be able to properly address these themes with
their patients in the near future. Proper Death Education courses
should therefore be implemented keeping in mind the need to
allow students to openly discuss, without prejudices or fear, the
theme of death and human vulnerability, and express the related
emotions through any mean they feel could be helpful.
LIMITS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
The research reports encouraging results that demonstrate the
positive effects of death education; however, some limitations
should be taken into account, including the inability to generalize
the results given the specificity of conditions. Concerning this,
future research should focus on significantly broaden the number
of participants. In addition to this, the idea of a longitudinal
study can be considered to see if the approach and discussion
of the existential issues addressed can actually be changed and
kept stable over time. Moreover, since the research participants
were mostly all female, even though psychology students are
usually more female than male future research could explore
more precisely more male psychology students’ point of view,
comparing it to the one of female students. Other interesting
aspects that could be investigated in future studies could also be
the perspective of medical, nursing and social services students,
as well as being conducted in other cultural contexts, since
comparing psychology students’ perspectives to the point of view
of other healthcare and social services professionals could be
particularly interesting and informative.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this
article will be made available by the authors, without
undue reservation.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The studies involving human participants were
reviewed and approved by Ethical Committee for
the Psychological Research of the University of
Padua N 57BC2002FDF5CBD4292F5F86AA077F23. The
patients/participants provided their written informed consent to
participate in this study.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
IT contributed to the research design and project planning,
supervision of the research, analysis of the texts, methodology,
and article writing. EI contributed to the project planning,
analysis of the texts, and article writing. CC contributed to
the interviews and analysis of the texts. LD contributed to the
supervision, cooperation, and organization of the teamwork, and
writing. SP contributed to the analysis of the texts, cooperation,
and organization of the team work. HO and MW contributed to
the writing. All authors contributed to the article and approved
the submitted version.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Davide Viezzoli, Marco Antonellini, Alice Culcasi, and
Gianmarco Biancalani for the help in some critical phases of
the work.




