COVID recovery vs COVID reality
By REUTERS

PUBLISHED: 10:14, 3 July 2020 | UPDATED: 10:14, 3 July 2020

By Marc Jones

LONDON, July 3 (Reuters) - World shares inched towards a four-month high on Friday and industrial bellwether metal copper was set for its longest weekly winning streak in nearly three years, as recovering global data kept nagging coronavirus nerves at bay.

The market rally fuelled by record U.S. jobs numbers had largely blown itself amid a spike in U.S. COVID cases, though the fastest expansion in China's services sector in over a decade and more stimulus ensured optimism remained.

Chinese shares had charged to their highest level in five years , helping the pan-Asian indexes to 4-month peaks, so the sight of European markets stalling early on took some traders by surprise.

Currency and commodity markets also had a subdued feel after an otherwise strong week for confidence-sensitive stalwarts such oil, copper, sterling and the Australian dollar, which all struggled on Friday.

"I think infection rates and fears of localised lockdowns have doused some of the enthusiasm," said Societe Generale strategist Kit Jukes.

"We have three elements now; vaccine hopes, decent data in most places but also the return of infection rates which can make you nervous."

Against a basket of currencies, the dollar rose slightly in early London trading. It was up less than 0.1% at 97.306 and still firmly on track for its biggest weekly fall since the first week of June.

The euro was down at $1.1226 and though it gained against the safe Swiss franc it fell versus the sometimes commodity-driven Norwegian crown.

S&amp;P 500 futures were down 0.2% but volumes were lower than usual due to a U.S. markets holiday on Friday for Independence Day.

U.S. nonfarm payrolls surged by 4.8 million jobs in June, above the average forecast of 3 million jobs in June, thanks to rises in the hard-hit hospitality sectors.

But economists noted there were caveats to the upbeat headline figures.

The number of permanent job losers continued to rise, increasing by 588,000 to 2.9 million in June while the unemployment rate remains a chunky 7.6 percentage points above its February level. A Deutsche Bank analysis put the U.S. unemployment rate behind all its developed market peers barring Canada.

The recovery also faces more headwinds as a surge of new coronavirus infections prompts U.S. states to delay and in some cases reverse plans to let stores reopen and activities resume.

More than three dozen U.S. states saw increases in COVID-19 cases, with cases in Florida spiking above 10,000.

Nevertheless markets are largely overlooking the spikes, taking the view that overall the situation was still improving overall.

Ten-year German government bond yields are up 5 basis points this week and set for their biggest weekly rise in a month, though they nudged down on Friday to -0.44%. Riskier Italian yields fell to 1.26% as well though, which is their lowest since late March.

Oil prices also eased after an otherwise solid week. Brent crude fell 0.65% to $42.86 a barrel while U.S. crude dropped 0.66% to $40.38 a barrel. Both were around $25 this time two months ago.

Copper prices were poised for a seventh consecutive weekly gain, their longest winning streak in nearly three years, despite a slight easing on the day after top supplier Chile had assured traders about supply.

Three-month LME copper was hovering at $6,040 a tonne, more than $1,500 up from lows it ploughed to in March.

"The one issue that hangs over all the markets is will we see a surge in secondary infections that will trigger a second wave of national rather than regional shutdowns?" Malcolm Freeman, director of Kingdom Futures, wrote in a note.

(Reporting by Marc Jones)

NEW NEWSPAPER

COVID-19 vaccine frontrunners
By REUTERS

PUBLISHED: 17:55, 26 October 2020 | UPDATED: 17:55, 26 October 2020

Oct 26 (Reuters) - Pfizer Inc has said it could file in late November for U.S. authorization of the COVID-19 vaccine it is developing, opening up the possibility of a vaccine being available in the United States by the end of the year. Moderna and AstraZeneca are close behind the largest U.S. drugmaker and are likely to have early data on their vaccine candidates before the end of the year as well. More than 150 potential vaccines are being developed and tested globally to stop the COVID-19 pandemic, with 42 in human trials, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). The following list tracks the candidates that are in the final stages of testing. For a separate FACTBOX on all the coronavirus vaccines under development, click COMPANY STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT EXPECTED DOSES Pfizer Inc &amp; Late-stage trials underway. U.S.- 100 mln + option for 500 BioNTech SE Pfizer said earlier in October it mln more could file for U.S. emergency use authorization in late November, UK - 30 mln indicating that a vaccine could potentially be available in the EU - 200 mln + 100 mln additional U.S. by the end of the year. Canada - Not specified Japan - 120 mln Moderna Inc Completed enrollment of 30,000 U.S.- 100 mln + option for subjects in a late-stage trial. additional 400 mln Interim results from the trial expected in November. EU- 80 mln Japan- 40 mln or more, to be distributed by Takeda Canada- Not specified Johnson &amp; Johnson Large U.S. vaccine trial set to U.S.- 100 mln + 200 mln more resume after it was paused due to under subsequent agreement illness in a study volunteer. Results from the trial expected UK- 30 mln + option for up to 22 by the end of 2020 or early 2021 mln more EU- 200 mln + 200 mln additional Canada- Up to 38 mln Japan- Not Applicable AstraZeneca Plc &amp; Late-stage trials underway with a (Supply deals with 17 countries Oxford University U.S. trial of vaccine candidate for more than 1.5 bln doses) on pause since Sept. 6, after a patient fell ill. Trial results U.S.- 300 mln expected in coming weeks UK- Up to 30 mln (part of a commitment to deliver 100 mln total) EU- At least 300 mln + 100 mln additional Italy, Germany, the Netherlands and France- 300 mln + 100 mln additional Canada- Up to 20 mln Japan- 120 mln Sinovac Biotech Ltd Late-stage trials in Brazil, Vaccine approved for emergency Indonesia and Turkey underway; use in China in July; supply deal Prelim data expected in November with Indonesia for at least 40 mln doses before Mar 2021 Gamaleya Research Late-stage trial of main COVID-19 16,000 people inoculated so far Institute vaccine, Sputnik-V, underway in Russia. Supply deals with 7 since Sept, with prelim data countries including India, expected in November Brazil, Saudi Arabia for more than 269 mln doses CanSino Biologics Inc Vaccine candidate in final-stage Mexico - 35 mln doses as early as trials has been approved for use Dec in the Chinese military. Late-stage trial underway in Pakistan Sinopharm Group Co Ltd Late-stage trials Expects to produce more than 1 underway billion doses in 2021 (Reporting By Dania Nadeem and Mrinalika Roy in Bengaluru; editing by Ankur Banerjee and Maju Samuel)


NEW NEWSPAPER

Giants ID another COVID case
By REUTERS

PUBLISHED: 15:16, 17 November 2020 | UPDATED: 15:16, 17 November 2020

The New York Giants have another case of COVID-19.

"(Monday) night, we were notified that a player tested positive for COVID-19," the Giants announced Tuesday morning. "The player was immediately self-isolated, and the contact tracing process was initiated. Two close contacts, both staff members, were identified and were informed to remain home today."

The Giants (3-7) are entering their bye week and don't play in Week 11. This is the second time the team had a player test positive for COVID-19.

Prior to playing the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in Week 8, offensive lineman Will Hernandez tested positive.

Hernandez, who spent nearly two weeks on the reserve/COVID-19 list, returned to the team last week and played in Sunday's victory over the Philadelphia Eagles.

--Field Level Media

NEW NEWSPAPER

Covid-19 Antivirals Taskforce launched
By PA MEDIA

PUBLISHED: 17:04, 20 April 2021 | UPDATED: 19:08, 20 April 2021
At-home Covid-19 treatments are being sought by a team of Government experts to speed up recovery time for people who become infected with the virus.

The Government has set up a new taskforce to “supercharge” the search for antiviral medications for Covid-19.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the group will seek out new medicines to “stop Covid-19 in its tracks”.

It is hoped that antivirals could help to reduce infections and limit the impact of any new variants.

They may also help to protect people who cannot take vaccines or those who are not fully protected after having the jab.

Officials hope to find and bring two treatments online this year.

This could mean that people with Covid-19, or those they have been in close contact with, could be offered antiviral medication – offered in tablet form – to stop the infection spreading and speed up recovery time.

The new Antivirals Taskforce, which is yet to appoint a chair, will search for the most promising potential antiviral medicines which can be taken at home.

The taskforce will support the development of the drugs through clinical trials and also look at manufacturing opportunities.

Antiviral drugs are a type of medication used specifically for treating viral infections, and act by killing or preventing the growth of viruses.

“The success of our vaccination programme has demonstrated what the UK can achieve when we bring together our brightest minds,” said Mr Johnson.

“Our new Antivirals Taskforce will seek to develop innovative treatments you can take at home to stop Covid-19 in its tracks.

“These could provide another vital defence against any future increase in infections and save more lives.”

Health Secretary Matt Hancock said: “Medicines are a vital weapon to protect our loved ones from this terrible virus.

“Modelled on the success of the vaccines and therapeutics taskforces, which have played a crucial part in our response to the pandemic, we are now bringing together a new team that will supercharge the search for antiviral treatments and roll them out as soon as the autumn.”

The Government’s chief scientific adviser Sir Patrick Vallance said: “The speed at which vaccines and therapeutics such as dexamethasone have been identified and deployed against Covid-19 has been critical to the pandemic response.

“Antivirals in tablet form are another key tool for the response.

“They could help protect those not protected by or ineligible for vaccines.

“They could also be another layer of defence in the face of new variants of concern.”

Dr Nikita Kanani, medical director of primary care for NHS England, said: “The NHS has put research into reality at record speed during the pandemic and this taskforce will now help us to identify and roll out even more new, convenient treatments for patients with Covid-19.”

Commenting on the announcement, Dr Penny Ward, visiting professor in pharmaceutical medicine at Kings College London, said: “Antiviral treatment of influenza has been shown to reduce hospitalisation and prevent death in epidemic and pandemic waves and a similar, preferably simple to use antiviral, suitable for use in the community can add to the range of interventions critical to enable us to remain on top of the Covid pandemic even in the event of the emergence of viral variants insensitive to vaccines.”

She said that there are a number of early phase trials looking at oral antiviral medications.


NEW NEWSPAPER

African Covid deaths top 100,000
By AFP

PUBLISHED: 19:32, 18 February 2021 | UPDATED: 19:32, 18 February 2021

Africa on Thursday recorded more than 100,000 deaths from Covid-19, a grim milestone likely to understate the real toll, as the continent of 1.2 billion people battles a second wave of infections.

The 54 countries in the region have a death toll of 100,000 from 3,793,660 reported cases, according to an AFP tally.

The continent, relatively spared by the pandemic, is the last except Oceania to reach the threshold of 100,000 deaths, which Europe crossed in April 2020.

South Africa -- the worst hit African country -- rolled out a mass testing campaign at the start of the pandemic.

To date, the country has recorded nearly 1.5 million cases and more than 48,000 deaths.

But those figures, based on daily reports communicated by health authorities, only reflect a fraction of the actual case load, health specialists say.

"The cases are clearly under-reported because of poor access to healthcare facilities and under-reporting of milder cases," South African virologist Barry Schoub, also a member of the Scientific Council at the South African Ministry of Health told AFP.

Understaffed health facilities and lack of means have meant many African countries have been unable to do mass testing.

"Many countries have mainly PCR tests in the capitals. And the further one moves away from the urban centres, the less there are tests," explained French epidemiologist Emmanuel Baron from Doctors Without Borders.

"It is a disease that can go unnoticed with asymptomatic patients, or with symptoms that can be confused with others," he added.

- Covid found in pawpaw -

In Zimbabwe, a country with a devastated economy and mismanaged health system, hospitals are filled with Covid patients, exhausted doctors and overwhelmed nurses. But the official number of cases remains low.

Tanzania stopped testing in May 2020 after claiming it had found a positive Covid case in a pawpaw, a quail and even a goat. The Tanzanian government last released official figures in April.

"If someone had told me a year ago that we, as a continent, would see 100,000 deaths from this infection, I probably would not have believed it," John Nkengasong, the Africa Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Preventions (CDC), told reporters on Thursday.

The toll in Africa is, however, significantly lower than in Europe, the world´s most affected region, with 818,912 deaths recorded so far. The other regions that are badly hit are Latin America with 649,006 deaths and the United States and Canada 512,295 deaths.

After a sharp increase in January, Africa´s figures have fallen sharply in the past few weeks. Over the last seven days, the continent recorded 3,054 deaths, a drop of 18 percent from the previous week.

At the height of the pandemic in January, the continent had 906 deaths per day.

- No disaster -

While coronavirus figures are clearly underestimated, "we have not seen a health disaster in Africa to date", said Baron.

Several studies on antibodies, which make it possible to detect whether a person who is recovered has previously been exposed to the virus, are underway in many African countries and should provide a better idea of the impact of the pandemic in the region.

South Africa, where almost all of the latest cases are attributed to a variant of the virus known to be more contagious and which has spread widely, represents nearly half of the deaths and reported cases on the continent.

The other African countries that are most affected are Egypt (10,150 deaths from 175,677 cases) and Morocco (8,524 deaths from 480,056 cases).

South Africa is also the country with most Covid-19 fatalities on the continent, counting 82 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, ahead of Tunisia (65 deaths) and Eswatini (55).

Lagging behind in the vaccination race, the continent's leading industrial powerhouse administered its first vaccines on Wednesday.

Globally, Covid-19 has caused more than 109 million infections and over 2.4 million deaths since the start of the epidemic in Wuhan in China in December 2019.

bur-kau-meh-cld-ho/sch/har

NEW NEWSPAPER

Gyms aren't COVID hotspots: industry
By AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATED PRESS

PUBLISHED: 01:56, 13 August 2020 | UPDATED: 01:56, 13 August 2020

The fitness industry has hit back at the perception that gyms are COVID-19 hotspots, saying there has been no transmission of the virus linked to gyms.

Fitness Australia chief executive Barrie Elvish said Fitness Australia has gathered data from a random sample of NSW operators that proves gyms are safe.

Since gyms reopened on June 13, there had been more than 6.26 million visits to 423 NSW gyms, with no recorded community transmission, he said.

"The same cannot be said for restaurants or bars in NSW where cluster cases have started and spread. However, gyms are still being categorised with these and other entertainment venues and cast in a negative light," he said in a statement on Thursday.

However, misinformation and negative commentary portrayed health and fitness facilities as "hotspots" for COVID-19, resulting in some people being too scared to exercise at their gym, he said, despite additional precautions and stringent hygiene practices.

The Fitness Australia data was gathered from electronic swipes, used by members for access, which also could be used for sophisticated contact tracing should it be required.

Mr Elvish said there had been 13 reported cases in NSW where a member had visited the gym while infected with COVID-19 but health authorities had not identified any cases of transmission in a gym.

"We are not part of the problem. We are actually part of the solution to getting more Australians more active more often and help prevent long-term lifestyle-related disease," Mr Elvish said.

"We are urging the government to work with Fitness Australia, and the industry, to ensure the health and safety of the community."

NEW NEWSPAPER

COVID-19 victims maintain immunity
By AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATED PRESS

PUBLISHED: 20:23, 22 November 2020 | UPDATED: 20:23, 22 November 2020

Australian researchers have discovered that patients who've been infected with COVID-19 retain immunity against the virus and the disease for at least eight months.

The research is the strongest evidence yet that vaccines against the virus will work for long periods.

Previous studies found the first wave of antibodies produced by the human body after infection waned after the first few months, raising concerns that people could quickly lose immunity.

The new research allays those concerns.

The study is the result of a collaboration led by Associate Professor Menno van Zelm, from Monash University and was published on Monday in the preprint server, MedRxiv.

The researchers found a specific cell within the human immune system, the memory B cell, "remembers" infection by the virus, and if challenged again, through re-exposure to the virus, triggers a protective immune response through rapid production of protective antibodies.

The researchers recruited 25 COVID-19 patients and took 36 blood samples between day four post-infection and day 242 post-infection.

As with other studies, looking at the antibody response, the researchers found that antibodies against the virus started to drop off after 20 days post-infection.

However, all patients continued to have memory B cells that recognised one of two components of the virus, the spike and nucleocapsid proteins.

These virus-specific memory B cells were present as long as eight months after infection.

Associate Professor van Zelm said the results gave hope to the efficacy of any vaccine against the virus and explained why there had been so few examples of genuine reinfection in the millions of people who had tested positive for the virus globally.

"These results are important because they show, definitively, that patients infected with the COVID-19 virus do in fact retain immunity against the virus and the disease," he said.

"This has been a black cloud hanging over the potential protection that could be provided by any COVID-19 vaccine and gives real hope that, once a vaccine or vaccines are developed, they will provide long-term protection."

NEW NEWSPAPER

The origins of COVID-19
By REUTERS

PUBLISHED: 03:30, 19 January 2021 | UPDATED: 03:45, 19 January 2021

SHANGHAI, Jan 19 (Reuters) - As a team from the World Health Organization works in China to investigate the origins of COVID-19, the following factbox looks at what we know about how the pandemic began.

CHINA ORIGINS

The coronavirus that causes COVID-19 - known as SARS-CoV-2 - was first identified in the central Chinese city of Wuhan in January 2020, and most scientists believe it is still most likely that it originated in China.

Peter Ben Embarek, WHO expert on food safety and zoonotic diseases, said Wuhan offered "the first solid clues" about the transmission of COVID-19 and any investigation would start there.

Though some studies have suggested COVID-19 was present in Italy or Spain earlier in 2019, and that it might have been responsible for a spike in pneumonia cases in France, few researchers believe it could have entered Wuhan from Europe.

Its closest relative in nature is the RaTG13 virus, which was discovered in horseshoe bats in southwest China's Yunnan province. The 96.2% genetic match between the two makes it highly likely that COVID-19 also originated in the bat colonies of China's southwest border regions.

HUANAN MARKET

The initial cluster of infections was traced back to the Huanan seafood market in Wuhan, leading many to assume that "patient zero" was probably a trader exposed to contaminated meat products.

But this version of events may be too simplistic to explain the patterns of infection in Wuhan and elsewhere.

Many of the earliest reported cases had no connection with the market. On Dec. 10, 2019, 41 Wuhan residents were hospitalised with what turned out to be COVID-19, but 13 of them had no link to Huanan.

A team of Chinese researchers said there were two types of SARS-CoV-2 circulating in Wuhan, only one of which was associated with the market.

Scientists also said the virus was unusually "pre-adapted" for rapid human transmission, making it unlikely that the first human contact was made at the seafood market.

INTERMEDIARY SPECIES?

WHO investigators are keen to find what the intermediary species was that allowed SARS-CoV-2 to move from its original bat host into humans.

Preliminary scientific papers in China identified snakes and mink as potential candidates, and similar coronavirus infections were also found in pangolins illegally trafficked into China.

But some scholars now believe there was no intermediary species at all, and that a SARS-CoV-2 like virus was transmitted directly from bats to humans, possibly on multiple occasions.

The first people infected were likely to be traders in bat meat, or in bat droppings used in traditional Chinese medicine, and one of them could have carried it into the Huanan seafood market, causing the superspreader event that allowed the pandemic to begin.

"GAIN OF FUNCTION"

Though there is no credible supporting evidence, some researchers still do not rule out the possibility that the virus was released accidentally by a specialist lab at the Wuhan Institute of Virology.

There is no indication that SARS-Cov-2 contains any synthetic insertions, but some researchers say it could have been subject to a process known as "gain of function", where the lab forces the virus to become more infectious by exposing it to human receptor cells.

Some experts say the WHO investigators needs to be granted access to all the research conducted in the lab to see whether there are any closer matches than the RaTG13 virus.

But there is another explanation why the coronavirus has proven to be so lethal.

If SARS-CoV-2 had been circulating in humans throughout southwest China for months before it was finally identified in Wuhan, natural selection itself could have trained it to bind more effectively to those receptor cells.

Fully optimised after months of human exposure, it made an explosive breakthrough at the Huanan market, where conditions were ideal for rapid viral transmission - though it was also very likely spreading elsewhere. (Reporting by David Stanway. Editing by Gerry Doyle)


NEW NEWSPAPER

Australian COVID-19 testing criteria
By AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATED PRESS

PUBLISHED: 07:10, 14 April 2020 | UPDATED: 07:10, 14 April 2020

WHAT CRITERIA PEOPLE IN AUSTRALIA NEED TO MEET IN ORDER TO GET TESTED FOR THE COVID-19.

VICTORIA

* Testing has expanded in Victoria to include anyone experiencing fever and acute respiratory symptoms.

* Testing available for anyone who recently returned from travel or has come into contact with a confirmed case.

* GPs and 40 public screening clinics have opened to test people for COVID-19.

---

NEW SOUTH WALES

* Testing recommended for anyone displaying fever or acute respiratory infection symptoms.

* Overseas travellers in the past 14 days, cruise ship passengers or crew members or those who have been in close contact with a confirmed case are urged to get tested.

* Sick healthcare and aged care workers are recommended to get tested for the infection.

* People living in Penrith, Sydney's inner west, Liverpool, Randwick, Waverley, Woollahra, Blacktown, Cumberland, Westmead, Ryde, Manning and Lake Macquarie are urged to seek testing if they display any symptoms as community-to-community transmission has occurred in these areas.

---

QUEENSLAND

* People displaying fever or acute respiratory symptoms and have been in close contact with a confirmed case or have been overseas within the past 14 days can be tested.

* Workers in a "vulnerable setting" including healthcare, aged care, the military, education, and corrections can be tested.

* People who live in Brisbane, Gold Coast, Cairns or a First Nations community can also be tested if they show symptoms.

* People travelling from a declared COVID-19 hotspot or interstate may also be tested.

---

SOUTH AUSTRALIA

* Residents are advised to get tested if they have travelled overseas or interstate in the past 14 days.

* Testing is advised for people who have been in contact with a confirmed case AND are displaying coronavirus symptoms.

* Healthcare workers with direct patient contact or aged and residential care workers who have a fever OR an acute respiratory infection (shortness of breath, cough, sore throat) are urged to get tested.

* People in Tanunda, Nuriootpa, Williamstown, Angaston and Lyndoch from March 14 and have developed COVID-19 symptoms should immediately self-isolate and get tested after 39 cases were linked in the Barossa region.

* SA Health recommends testing for Qantas staff who have been in the affected areas at Adelaide Airport after an outbreak of 34 cases. Public areas have not been affected, but anyone who has been to the airport and has developed symptoms is urged to self-isolate and seek testing.

---

WESTERN AUSTRALIA

* People can get tested if they have a fever, a recent history of fever or an acute respiratory infection (shortness of breath, cough, sore throat).

* People working in high-risk settings such as healthcare, aged care and disability, and WA Police officers can get tested.

* Residents are not required to have travelled interstate or overseas or been in contact with a confirmed case to get a test.

* People in metropolitan areas can get tested in any of the nine testing clinics while those in regional areas can get tested at a public hospital, health service or remote health clinic.

* Authorities indicate more random testing to find non-symptomatic carriers as the likely next step after very little community spread was found in the state's results.

---

TASMANIA * Tasmanians who display coronavirus symptoms and have recently travelled overseas or interstate can apply to their GP or through Public Health Services to get tested.

* People who have been on a cruise ship or have been in contact with a person with COVID-19 can apply to get tested.

* The state government has changed the testing criteria to allow testing for people who have spent time in Tasmania's northwest and have developed a fever or respiratory symptoms.

--- NORTHERN TERRITORY * People who have returned from interstate or overseas in the past 14 days and develop respiratory illness with or without fever can get tested.

* People who have been in close contact with a confirmed COVID-19 case in the past 14 days and develop respiratory illness with or without fever can get tested.

* People who have severe community-acquired pneumonia and there is no clear cause can seek testing.

* Healthcare workers who directly work with patients, and frontline workers, including police, emergency workers, educators, retail pharmacists and disability workers, who display respiratory illness or fever can get tested.

--- ACT

* People who have recently travelled overseas or on a cruise ship or have been in contact with a confirmed case, and have developed symptoms of COVID-19 within 14 days of returning to Australia are urged to get tested.

* Healthcare or aged care workers with recent onset of respiratory symptoms or fever irrespective of travel history can get tested.

* People living in a high-risk setting such as aged care, the military or correctional facilities and have symptoms of COVID-19 should get tested.

* Anyone who has travelled from an area where COVID-19 outbreaks have occurred, or have travelled to an area within Australia with an elevated risk of community transmission, and is displaying symptoms are urged to get tested.



NEW NEWSPAPER

Auckland removes all COVID restrictions
By AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATED PRESS

PUBLISHED: 22:49, 11 March 2021 | UPDATED: 23:24, 11 March 2021

New Zealand has downscaled COVID-19 alert levels in Auckland, marking the end of restrictions from the Valentine's Day outbreak.

However, Jacinda Ardern's government has been criticised for making the decision on Thursday and delaying the announcement.

First bloke Clarke Gayford jumped the gun on the prime minister, tweeting the government's decision four hours before Ms Ardern's scheduled press conference.

"An inprinciple (sic) decision was decided but its (sic) all pending on final test results today," he wrote, in response to criticism from Kiwi chef Martin Bosley.

"Feeling really sorry for all Auckland Hospo having to wait until 11.30am today to find out about moving levels. It's utterly ludicrous. Stay strong, my friends," Mr Bosley said.

Aucklanders were expecting the shift as there have been no community cases for a fortnight.

At 11:30am, Ms Ardern announced NZ's biggest city would move from alert level two to alert level one as of 12noon.

"Once again the city stepped up and did what it needed to do ... for that we say thank you," she said.

"Look after each other and enjoy your weekend."

The decision allows for crowds to gather to watch America's Cup sailing, the Auckland Cup racing meet on Saturday, and for postponed Auckland Pride events.

Business and hospitality figures attacked the decision, saying it did not allow them enough time to change staffing and order supplies for a bumper Friday night's trade.

Auckland Pride director Max Tweedie said the wait was "frustrating".

"The sector had anticipated a move at 11:59 tonight, which now changes everything for Friday night shows & events," he said.

"We need time to roll out plans, release tickets, change seating/signage. We didn't get it."

Opposition leader Judith Collins called the PM's communications "not good enough".

Ms Ardern said cabinet met on Thursday afternoon and decided to move alert levels, pending any new cases and testing of close contacts - information that was due on Friday morning.

Ms Ardern rejected the notion Mr Gayford's tweet was improper.

"I have not seen my partner since yesterday and I really reject the implication," she said.

"He has not known the decision. He's known the process which is exactly what Ministers have conveyed in the public domain."

The Valentine's Day outbreak, first identified on February 14, prompted the government into two lockdowns of New Zealand's biggest city.

The first was a three-day lockdown beginning February 15.

A week-long lockdown began on February 28 when a new community case was identified without links to the cluster, but was subsequently traced back to the outbreak.

In total, 15 people have tested positive to COVID-19 from the latest outbreak. Health officials are yet to discover its origin.
