REGINA v SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOMEDEPARTMENT, Ex parte HINDLEY[COURT OF APPEAL][2000] 1 QB 152HEARING-DATES: 5, 6, 7, October 5 November 19985 November 1998CATCHWORDS:Prisons - Prisoners' rights - Release on licence - Mandatory life sentence prisoner - Tariff element of determinate length provisionally fixed but not communicated to prisoner - Whole life tariff subsequently fixed and communicated - Policy of review of whole life tariff limited to considerations of retribution and deterrence but later amended to take account of exceptional circumstances - Whether increase from determinate tariff to whole life tariff lawful - Whether review policy lawful - Criminal Justice Act 1991 (c. 53), s. 35 - Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 (c. 43), s. 29HEADNOTE:In 1966 the applicant and a co-defendant were convicted of the murder of two children and received mandatory life sentences. The applicant was also convicted of being an accessory after the fact to the murder of a third child, of which the co-defendant was convicted, and was sentenced to a determinate custodial term. Immediately following the trial the judge expressed the expectation to the Home Office that the applicant would be kept in prison for "a very long time" and that her co-defendant would not be released in any foreseeable future. Review of any question of release was deferred until 1982 when, in response to the Secretary of State's request, the Lord Chief Justice recommended that, while he would never release her co-defendant, no term less than25 years would be appropriate for the applicant. In November 1983 the Secretary of State, in a statement to Parliament, announced his policy for the release of mandatory life sentence prisoners, in the exercise of his discretion under the Criminal Justice Act 1967, in particular that sexual or sadistic child murderers could normally expect to serve a tariff period of at least 20 years to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence, although a longer period might be necessary in certain cases, and that the first review would take place three years before the expiry of the tariff term. In January 1985, on further consultation, the Lord Chief Justice confirmed his recommendation, but the Secretary of State reached the provisional conclusion that 30 years would be the appropriate period for the applicant and 40 years for her co-defendant. In March 1985 the Secretary of State announced to Parliament that in the case of prisoners whose tariff was longer than 20 years the first formal review by the Parole Board would take place after 17 years in custody. He referred the cases of the applicant and her co-defendant to the board, which declined to recommend their release and decided to review the case of the applicant in five years and that of her co-defendant in 10 years. At that time the applicant was not told of, nor could she have calculated, the provisional 30-year period. In 1987 the applicant confessed to the police her complicity in the murder of the third child, of which her co-defendant had been convicted in 1966, and of two other children. In 1990 the Secretary of State concluded that only a whole life tariff was appropriate in the applicant's case. By his policy announced to Parliament in July 1993 the Secretary of State stated that, in the exercise of his release discretion, confirmed by section 35 of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, n1 a prisoner would be informed of his tariff, the judicial recommendations and any reasons for departing from them, and that exceptionally a tariff might be increased or reduced but that a prisoner might make representations against any such proposed increase. In December 1994 the Secretary of State announced his policy in respect of those serving a whole life tariff, that there would be periodic ministerial review after such a prisoner had served 25 years in custody to consider whether the tariff should be converted to one of determinate length, but that such review would be confined solely to considerations of retribution and deterrence. At that time the applicant was informed of the judicial recommendations, of the provisional 30-year period set in 1985 and of the decision to impose a whole life tariff in 1990. On 3 February 1997, following representations by the applicant, the Secretary of State fixed her tariff afresh at whole life. In November 1997 the Secretary of State revised the policy of December 1994, in the exercise of his release discretion under section 29 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, n2 and stated that on review after the 25-year period account would be taken of exceptional circumstances, including exceptional progress in prison. On 19 November 1997 he informed the applicant that while he would consider her representations on its reduction he saw no reason to depart from the whole life tariff imposed on her. In proceedings for judicial n1 Criminal Justice Act 1991, s. 35(2): "If recommended to do so by the board, the Secretary of State may, after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice together with the trial judge if available, release on licence a life prisoner who is not a discretionary life prisoner."n2 Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, s. 29(1): see post, p. 162A-B.review the applicant sought orders quashing the decisions to impose and to maintain a whole life tariff and declarations that the policy for review was unlawful. The Divisional Court held that the imposition of the whole life tariff on the applicant was lawful and that, while the 1994 review policy which had limited consideration solely to matters of retribution and deterrence had fettered the exercise of the Home Secretary's discretion and was unlawful, the revised 1997 policy which provided for account to be taken of exceptional circumstances had remedied that defect and the current policy was not unlawful and it dismissed the application.On appeal by the applicant: -Held, dismissing the appeal, that the imposition of a whole life tariff on a mandatory life prisoner was not unlawful since the Home Secretary was entitled to conclude that an offence was so heinous that (per Lord Woolf M.R.) he could not fix a period after which punishment and deterrence would not require the prisoner to be incarcerated or (per Hutchison and Judge L.JJ.) the requirements of retribution and deterrence could not be met save by lifelong incarceration of the offender; but that the Home Secretary still had to exercise his discretion to release by reviewing the position of such a prisoner from time to time; that, where a tariff had been fixed, the Home Secretary could not increase it in the absence of new circumstances; but that, since the applicant's 30-year tariff was provisional and had never been communicated to her, there was no abuse of process or unfairness involved when it was changed to whole life and, in any event, her confession in 1987 had created a new situation which justified an alteration in that tariff; and that, in view of the offences committed, the imposition of the whole life tariff on the applicant was not unreasonable (post, pp. 168B-E, 168G-169A,174D-E, 176E-F, 177A-D, 179F-H, 180E-F,191G-192A, 197A-C).Per Lord Woolf M.R. When considering the progress a prisoner has made whilst in prison, the Parole Board could make a contribution to the Home Secretary's decision. It would, therefore, be wrong for the Home Secretary not to be prepared to consider exercising his discretion to refer a prisoner's case to the Parole Board, though he is not obliged to do so (post, p. 169E).In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, H.L.(E.) and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, H.L.(E.) considered.Decision of the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division [1998] Q.B. 751; [1998] 2 W.L.R. 505 affirmed.INTRODUCTION:Appeal from the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division.By notice of motion dated 25 November 1997 and amended with leave of the Divisional Court the applicant, Myra Hindley, sought judicial review by way of (a) orders of certiorari to quash (1) a decision of the Secretary of State for the Home Department communicated on 3 February 1997 that she would serve a whole life tariff to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence in respect of the two offences of murder of which she had been convicted; and (2) a decision of the Secretary of State communicated on 19 November 1997 to maintain that tariff; and (b) declarations that (1) the policy of the Secretary of State, announced on 7 December 1994 Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer cols. 234-235, and maintained thereafter that those on whom whole life tariffs were imposed would not thereafter be able to gain release by virtue of their progress in prison and lack of dangerousness to society, and (2) the policy of the Secretary of State, announced on 10 November 1997 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer cols. 419-420 maintaining a category of "whole life" life sentence prisoners in respect of whom their length of time in custody, however long, their progress in prison, however great, and their lack of dangerousness to society, however clear, would never qualify them for more than the possibility of release before death as an exception to a predetermined general rule of lifelong incarceration were unlawful. On 18 December 1997 the application was dismissed by the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division (Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J., Hooper and Astill JJ.).By a notice of appeal dated 13 January 1998 and with the leave of the Divisional Court the applicant appealed on the grounds, inter alia, that (1) the policy of predetermining and imposing whole life tariffs was unlawful even where it was mitigated by allowance for release before the predetermined "natural life" term in exceptional circumstances; (2) in any event, the imposition of a whole life tariff on the applicant was unlawful as the Home Secretary could not increase the 30 year tariff provisionally fixed in 1985; (3) alternatively, the Home Secretary had failed to identify any good reason for increasing the applicant's tariff; (4) the decision to increase the applicant's tariff was irrational; and (5) the increase in tariff was based on an improper or ulterior motive.The facts are stated in the judgment of Lord Woolf M.R.COUNSEL:Edward Fitzgerald Q.C. and Tim Owen for the applicant. The sentence of life imprisonment for murder is not intended to order lifelong punitive detention but rather to authorise indefinite detention as long as that proves necessary in the light of the offender's progress in prison: see Hansard (H.C. Debates), 21 December 1964, cols. 887-888. The concept of a "whole life" tariff is alien to Parliament's intention in applying the parole system to all those convicted of murder: see section 1(2) of the Murder (Abolitionof Death Penalty) Act 1965, section 35(2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 and section 29 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997.The introduction of the tariff system and the gradual formalisation of the tariff exercise have created rights or legitimate expectations for life sentence prisoners and imposed duties on the Secretary of State vis-...-vis the fixing of tariffs. The setting of a tariff is a sentencing exercise or is so closely analogous to a sentencing exercise as to attract the basic safeguards, both procedural and substantive, that govern any exercise of fixing a penalty: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531; Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Venables [1998] A.C. 407 and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539. [Reference was also made to Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Stafford [1999] 2 A.C. 38; Raymond v. Honey [1983] 1 A.C. 1 and Reg. v. Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison, Ex parte Hague [1992] 1 A.C. 58.] If a sentencer directly or indirectly creates a legitimate expectation as to what a sentence will be, that expectation must be honoured: see Reg. v. Gillam (1980) 2 Cr.App.R.(S.) 267; Reg. v. Rennes (1985) 7 Cr.App.R.(S.) 343 and Gutteridge v. Director of Public Prosecutions (1987) 9 Cr.App.R.(S.) 279. A legitimate expectation may be created by conduct, practice or express undertakings. The Divisional Court adopted an unduly narrow approach by focusing exclusively on whether the tariff had been immutably fixed and directly communicated. [Reference was also made to Pratt v. Attorney-General for Jamaica [1994] 2 A.C. 1; Abbott v. Attorney-General of Trinidad and Tobago [1979] 1 W.L.R. 1342; Reg. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, Ex parte M.F.K. Underwriting Agents Ltd. [1990] 1 W.L.R. 1545; Reg. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, Ex parte Unilever Plc. [1996] S.T.C. 681; Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Asif Mahmood Khan [1984] 1 W.L.R. 1337 and Attorney-General of Hong Kong v. Ng Yuen Shiu [1983] 2 A.C. 629.]In any event, the imposition of a whole life tariff on the applicant offended against the basic principle of justice that a penalty once fixed should not be increased: see Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, 591, 603-604 and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte McCartney, The Times, 25 May 1994; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 667 of 1994. [Reference was also made to Attorney-General's Reference (No. 33 of 1996) [1997] 2 Cr.App.R.(S.) 10; Reg. v. Menocal [1980] A.C. 598; Reg. v. Nodjoumi (1985) 7 Cr.App.R.(S.) 183 and Reg. v. Hadley (1994) 16 Cr.App.R.(S.) 358.] The imposition of the whole life tariff amounted to an increase of the original fixed tariff: see Reg. v. Whittaker [1967] Crim.L.R. 431. In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318 does not assist the Secretary of State. It was concerned with the fixing of minimum tariffs, not with the increase of fixed tariffs. That decision, however, is obsolete. It was based on a characterisation of parole as "early release" which is no longer consistent with the theory or practice of the life sentence: see Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, 556. [Reference was also made to Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981] 1 W.L.R. 754 and In re Harper v. National Coal Board (Intended Action) [1974] Q.B. 614.]The reasons which the Secretary of State gave for imposing the whole life tariff were inadequate. They failed to address the arguments against anincrease of sentence and failed to indicate whether he accepted the applicant's mitigation plea that she had acted under threats and intimidation from her co-defendant. The Secretary of State should have detailed the material findings of fact on which the decision was based and dealt with all the fundamental issues of fact: see Reg. v. Parole Board, Ex parte Lodomez (1994) 26 B.M.L.R. 162; In re Poyser and Mills Arbitration [1964] 2 Q.B. 467; Reg. v. Solomon (1984) 6 Cr.App.R.(S.) 120 and Reg. v. Newton (1982) 77 Cr.App.R. 13.In any event, the sentence was irrational. It is a basic sentencing principle that the worst penalty should be reserved for the worst case: see Reg. v. Byrne (1975) 62 Cr.App.R. 159. The applicant appears to have been singled out for special treatment because of her notoriety and unpopularity rather than the necessity for a whole life tariff in her case. This is a uniquely severe punishment for a secondary party to murder.It was unlawful to predetermine the period to be served in custody by reference solely to considerations of retribution and deterrence and the facts known at the time of the sentence. To determine at the outset that a prisoner will not be released is to thwart the intention of Parliament in creating a parole system that excludes no category of offender from eligibility for parole. The whole life tariff policy is not saved by the provision for release in exceptional circumstances as the discretion to release conferred by Parliament is unfettered. [Reference was made to Reg. v. Nam and Sansbury [1968] S.A.S.R. 107 and Reg. v. Davidson [1966] N.Z.L.R. 626.]David Pannick Q.C. and Mark Shaw for the Secretary of State. Parliament has conferred a broad discretion on the Secretary of State in respect of the release from prison of mandatory life prisoners: see section 35(2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 and section 29(1) of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997. The Secretary of State has the responsibility of deciding appropriate policies and their application in relation to such prisoners and he has the power to change those policies from time to time: see In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, 332-333, 338. He is entitled to adopt a policy of setting tariffs and is not bound by the judicial view of the appropriate tariff in a particular case: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, 558-559. He has stated his policy that he will impose a whole life tariff when appropriate by reason of retribution and deterrence in a particular case: see Hansard (H.C. Debates), 7 December 1994, written answers, cols. 234-235 and 10 November 1997, written answers, cols. 419-420. [Reference was also made to Hussain v. United Kingdom (1996) 22 E.H.R.R. 1 and Wynne v. United Kingdom, 19 E.H.R.R. 333.]The applicant cannot rely on the opinions of Lord Steyn and Lord Hope of Craighead in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, 584, 592, 603-604 as her tariff was neither fixed nor communicated to her in 1985. In any event, Lord Browne-Wilkinson, Lord Lloyd of Berwick and Lord Goff of Chieveley recognised in that case the Secretary of State's power to increase a tariff previously fixed and communicated, so long as the policy in force from time to time so states: see pp. 563-564, 568-569, 572, 575-576, 579-582.The Secretary of State cannot lawfully be fettered by the views of his predecessor as to the appropriate tariff when he is considering the possibility of the applicant's release on life licence. The Secretary of State is obliged to take account of those views but is not obliged to follow them. Nor is he governed by any principle of non-aggravation of penalties. Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte McCartney, The Times, 25 May 1994; Court of Appeal (Civil Division): Transcript No. 667 of 1994 is distinguishable as being concerned only with a discretionary life sentence.The Secretary of State made clear his reasons for imposing a whole life tariff on the applicant. He did not have a duty to respond to each point made by the applicant. The court should be slow to substitute its views of the appropriate tariff for those of the Secretary of State: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, 558. It was not perverse for the Secretary of State to conclude that, even if the applicant had been corrupted, threatened and intimidated by her co-defendant, a whole life tariff was appropriate given the nature of the offences and her role in them. The Secretary of State has not acted by reference to irrelevant or improper factors. [Reference was made to Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 K.B. 223.]The whole life tariff does not frustrate the legislative intention of Parliament. If the Secretary of State is entitled to impose a tariff based on retribution and deterrence which must be served prior to release, he must, in principle, be entitled to consider whether for reasons of retribution and deterrence the appropriate tariff is the whole of the offender's life. The fact that Parliament has given power to release murderers on life licence does not oblige the Secretary of State to exercise those powers in relation to each and every murderer. Section 35(2) of the Act of 1991 does not exclude the possibility of a whole life tariff in the context of a sentence which is "imprisonment for life."The appropriate tariff for a discretionary life sentence is normally set by the trial judge in open court. However, the trial judge may decide not to fix a tariff if he considers that detention for life is justified by the seriousness of the offence: see Practice Direction (Crime: Life Sentences) [1993] 1 W.L.R. 223. It would be odd if detention for life could never be applied in relation to an offender who has committed murder. [Reference was made to Thynne v. United Kingdom (1990) 13 E.H.R.R. 666.]A whole life tariff does not fetter the discretion to grant release on life licence to any prisoner. The tariff is not immutable but merely reflects the current view of the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State remains willing to reconsider and review the tariff from time to time. Moreover, under the 1997 policy, exceptional progress in custody may reduce the length of a tariff. Therefore, the whole life tariff merely informs the offender that, by reason of the requirements of retribution and deterrence, the Secretary of State does not presently believe that he or she should ever be released.Fitzgerald Q.C. replied.Cur. adv. vult.5 November. The following judgments were handed down.PANEL: Lord Woolf M.R., Hutchison and Judge L.JJJUDGMENTBY-1: Lord Woolf M.RJUDGMENT-1:Lord Woolf M.R:The backgroundThis is an appeal by Myra Hindley from the decision [1998] Q.B. 751 of Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J., Hooper and Astill JJ. sitting in the Divisional Court on 18 December 1997. The decision relates to an application made by the applicant for judicial review. The application challenges the lawfulness of a policy statement by the former Secretary of State, Mr. Michael Howard, dated 7 December 1994 and his decision of 3 February 1997 that the period of her tariff should be whole life. The application was made on 23 April 1997 and leave was granted to move for judicial review on 16 May 1997. Following the change of government, Mr. Jack Straw became Home Secretary. He made a further statement of policy on 10 November 1997. On 19 November 1997 he affirmed the decision of a whole life tariff set by his predecessor. The application for judicial review was then extended so that it also applied to the later policy statement and decision. Both the applicant and the Home Office are agreed that whether the applicant's whole life tariff should be reduced "by reason of exceptional progress is to be considered and determined by the Home Secretary after the court has considered the other points" raised on the application for judicial review.In his judgment Lord Bingham C.J. came to the following conclusions with which the other members of the court agreed. 1. Both decisions of the Home Secretaries were lawful and neither decision was vitiated by lack of reasons. 2. The policy decision of 7 December 1994 was unlawful in that it failed to make any allowance for the possibility that in exceptional circumstances, such as exceptional progress by a prisoner while in custody, a review and reduction of the mandatory life sentence prisoner's tariff term might be made. 3. The policy of 10 November 1997 was not unlawful. There is no cross-appeal as to the finding that the policy of 7 December 1994 was unlawful. Nor has there been any appeal against the conclusion of the Divisional Court that Mr. Howard's decision of 3 February 1997 was lawful, notwithstanding that it was taken applying a policy which is now accepted to be unlawful. The reason for this is no doubt that any success on the appeal in relation to that decision would be of no benefit to the applicant as that decision has been overtaken by the subsequent decision of Mr. Straw. The argument of the applicant on the appeal does however make it obvious that she does not accept the lawfulness of the earlier decision.As did Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J. in his judgment, I start this judgment by making it clear that these proceedings are limited to requiring the courts to consider the lawfulness of the decisions and policy statements made by successive Home Secretaries. It is not part of our function to decide whether the applicant should be released from prison, or whether she should remain in prison; or, if she is to remain in prison, to decide how long she should remain in prison. The best that the applicant could hope to achieve by these proceedings is a change from the present policy and the reconsideration of her position in the light of that change ofpolicy. This does not diminish the significance of this case to both the Home Secretary and the applicant. The Home Secretary is concerned to maintain his position that for the most serious murders, he is entitled to apply a policy which means literally that for the rest of their lives they will remain in prison. As confirmation of this the court was told in the course of argument that the Home Office is evaluating the provision which already exists in the United States for geriatric prisoners. The adverse consequences to the applicant of the latest policy and decision are obvious. Absent a further change of policy or "exceptional" circumstances, it is intended she should remain in prison for the rest of her life. She has already served over 32 years and as she is now 56 she could well serve another 30 years or more in prison.As the Divisional Court decision is now reported and this appeal primarily turns on questions of law, it is not necessary to repeat the details of the horrendous crimes which the applicant committed between July 1963 and October 1965. She was convicted of two murders, and of being an accessory after the fact to a third, of children. A statement she made in 1987 to the police indicated that altogether she was involved with her co-defendant Ian Brady in five murders. It is true that that statement and other evidence strongly indicate that in relation to these crimes, she was acting under the domination of Ian Brady. However it would not be unreasonable to treat the statement as disclosing a picture of an involvement which is even more serious than that which was indicated by the evidence given at the trial.Having made clear that this court has not and could not be under any illusion as to the gravity of the applicant's crimes, it is also important not to forget that "a convicted prisoner . . . retains all civil rights which are not taken away expressly or by necessary implication:" Raymond v. Honey [1983] 1 A.C. 1, 10, per Lord Wilberforce. Like any other citizen, she is entitled where she has grounds for suggesting that the Home Secretary has acted unlawfully to have his conduct scrutinised by the courts on an application for judicial review.The relevant statutory provisions and the Secretary of State's discretionIn order to resolve the issues on this appeal, it is necessary to examine the current statutory provisions and the latest policy of the Secretary of State in some detail. When doing this, it is important to have in mind the legislative history of the present statutory provisions and the stages by which the present policy evolved. This has been influenced by a series of cases in the House of Lords to which it will be necessary to refer. They commence with Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531. These cases set out the history. The history is also set out in the judgments of Lord Bingham C.J. [1998] Q.B. 751 and Judge L.J. on this appeal. I cannot improve on these accounts and so I only set out in full the relevant current statutory position and the present policy.It is section 1(1) of the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965 which provides for the mandatory life sentence for those found guilty of murder. Section 1(1) provides: "No person shall suffer death for murder, and a person convicted of murder shall . . . be sentenced to imprisonmentfor life." Section 1(1) of the Act of 1965 has now to be read with sections 29 and 30 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997. Section 29 states:"(1) If recommended to do so by the Parole Board, the Secretary of State may, after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice together with the trial judge if available, release on licence a life prisoner who is not one to whom section 28 above applies. (2) The Parole Board shall not make a recommendation under subsection (1) above unless the Secretary of State has referred the particular case, or the class of case to which that case belongs, to the board for its advice."Section 30 provides:"(1) The Secretary of State may at any time release a life prisoner on licence if he is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist which justify the prisoner's release on compassionate grounds. (2) Before releasing a life prisoner under subsection (1) above, the Secretary of State shall consult the Parole Board, unless the circumstances are such as to render such consultation impracticable."The Act of 1997 also contains different provisions relating to prisoners who have been sentenced to a discretionary life sentence. In connection with these prisoners the Home Secretary's role is now subordinate to that of the court and the Parole Board.The statutory provisions I have set out make it clear that the sentence for murder always remains a sentence which continues for the life of the prisoner. Sections 29 and 30 of the Act of 1997 do not affect this. Their effect is limited to permitting the release of a prisoner, who remains a life prisoner, on licence; a licence that may in specified circumstances be revoked leading to the prisoner's recall to prison. It is this discretion of the Secretary of State to release on licence which is central to this appeal. The Secretary of State's discretion is only made subject to two express limitations. The first is the requirement of a recommendation from the Parole Board and the second is a requirement to consult the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge (if available). In practice it is well established that the consultation with the judiciary is as to the period which is appropriate for the prisoner to serve in prison by way of retribution and deterrence and that the Parole Board makes its recommendation as to the risk of the prisoner reoffending. In relation to discretionary life prisoners, the role of the Parole Board and the judiciary are made statutory by section 28 of the Act of 1997.Under section 28(7) a discretionary life prisoner has in specified circumstances the right to require the Secretary of State to refer his case to the Parole Board. A mandatory life prisoner has no similar right. In addition unless the Secretary of State refers a particular case to the board for its advice, the board is not in a position to make a recommendation.Despite the absence of any express obligation to refer a case to the board, the Secretary of State is clearly required to refer a case to the board, so that he shall have the benefit of their recommendation, if he is considering releasing a prisoner on licence. Otherwise he could fetter or frustrate his discretion to release a prisoner on licence. Parliament having entrusted him with a discretion to release, he cannot create a situationwhere he cannot exercise that discretion. It can therefore be said that the Secretary of State has two discretions both of which he can be under a duty to consider exercising. The primary discretion is that of deciding whether a prisoner should be released, and the secondary discretion is as to when to seek the recommendation of the Parole Board. The position is very much the same as to consulting the judiciary.Due process or abuse of processArticle 5(4) of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (1953) (Cmd. 8969) does not require the continued detention of a mandatory life prisoner to be subject to review by a court: see Wynne v. United Kingdom (1994) 19 E.H.R.R. 333. However as is the case with any sentence of a court, the common law does require compliance with the principles of fairness or of due process not only before sentence but also after sentence while it is being carried out. The same point can be made by saying that the executive can be guilty of abuse of process after sentence although the conditions of detention, even if intolerable, will not render the detention itself unlawful: see Reg. v. Deputy Governor of Parkhurst Prison, Ex parte Hague [1992] 1 A.C. 58, 166, 167. The principle of due process is not confined to procedure. It can have effect on the substance of what is happening in carrying out the sentence. Like many of the underlying principles of the common law, the principle of due process or fairness may not be readily discernible or overtly enunciated in the authorities. It can none the less be identified as the theme linking together a series of decisions dealing with the same subject matter. In the cases placed before this court for the purposes of the appeal, it is most readily discerned in a decision of the Privy Council in Pratt v. Attorney-General for Jamaica [1994] 2 A.C. 1. That case was concerned with delay in carrying out an execution when a court in Jamaica had passed a sentence of death. Jamaica has a written constitution which could in itself be regarded as reflecting common law principles. However the Privy Council was concerned as to what would have been the position at common law with regard to the carrying out of an execution before Jamaican independence. In delivering the judgment of the Privy Council, Lord Griffiths stated, at p. 19:"It is difficult to envisage any circumstances in which in England a condemned man would have been kept in prison for years awaiting execution. But if such a situation had been brought to the attention of the court their Lordships do not doubt that the judges would have stayed the execution to enable the prerogative of mercy to be exercised and the sentence commuted to one of life imprisonment. Prior to independence, applying the English common law, judges in Jamaica would have had the like power to stay a long delayed execution, as foreshadowed by Lord Diplock in Abbott v. Attorney-General of Trinidad and Tobago [1979] 1 W.L.R. 1342, 1348, when he said: 'In such a case, which is without precedent and, in their Lordships' view, would involve delay measured in years, rather than in months, it might be argued that the taking of the condemned man's life was not by due process of law . . .'"Due process is a concept which is more often referred to in the decisions of the courts in North America than in this jurisdiction. Here the expressions abuse of process and fairness are usually preferred. However, whichever expression is used, as Pratt v. Attorney-General for Jamaica [1994] 2 A.C. 1 vividly illustrates, it can result in substantive benefits not only for an accused before sentence but also for a prisoner after sentence. In Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, in a landmark judgment, the House of Lords made an immense stride in securing due process for prisoners serving a mandatory life sentence. Lord Mustill, at p. 556, drew attention to the fact that as a consequence of the policy to which successive Home Secretaries have given effect since Mr. Brittan announced the change of policy on 30 November 1983, the indeterminate sentence of life imprisonment "is at a very early stage formally broken down into penal and risk elements:""If the matter is approached in this way the Home Secretary can be regarded as exercising a very broad general discretion, in which all the relevant factors are weighed together when deciding whether the public interest permits release, in very much the same way as the discretion had been exercised before the Parole Board came on the scene; and from this it is not a long step to hold that since the prisoner is essentially in mercy there was no ground to ascribe to him the rights which fairness might otherwise demand. This reasoning is however much weakened now that the indeterminate sentence is at a very early stage formally broken down into penal and risk elements. The prisoner no longer has to hope for mercy but instead knows that once he has served the 'tariff' the penal consequences of his crime have been exhausted. Even if the Home Secretary still retains his controlling discretion as regards the assessment of culpability the fixing of the penal element begins to look much more like an orthodox sentencing exercise, and less like a general power exercised completely at large:" pp. 556-557 (emphasis added).Lord Mustill went on to conclude that a mandatory life prisoner's entitlement is: (a) to make written representations before his tariff is set by the Secretary of State, (b) the Secretary of State is required to tell the prisoner what period the judiciary have recommended he should serve for the purposes of retribution and deterrence and of any other opinion expressed or reasons given by the judiciary which are or may be relevant to the Secretary of State's decision as to the appropriate period to be served for these purposes, and that while the Secretary of State was not obliged to adopt the judicial view of tariff, if he departed from it he was required to give reasons for doing so.Each of these requirements can equally well be regarded as a requirement of fairness or due process. Together they establish a structure which should enable the Home Secretary more effectively to perform his critically important discretion of determining when a life prisoner should be released back into the community. In addition they provide a structure which enables the courts to perform their task of ensuring that the Secretary of State exercises his discretion according to law.The policyHaving made those, what I am afraid, are no more than preliminary comments about the legislation, it is now convenient to turn to the Secretary of State's current policy. The policy is a descendant of the policy of Mr. Leon Brittan of 30 November 1983 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer cols. 505-507, to which I have already made reference. Mr. Brittan's policy had revealed to the public at large that there were two strands involved in the decision making process of determining when a life prisoner should be released on licence. The first involved the requirements of retribution and deterrence, as to which the judiciary made an input, and the second involved the question of risk, which was for the consideration of the Parole Board. A policy of this nature was required to enable the Secretary of State to exercise the discretion with which he had been entrusted by Parliament. It was needed so as to know when to seek the recommendation of the Parole Board and the views of the judiciary. At that time the prisoner was kept in the dark as to what had been decided in his case. However he would be able to form a view as to what at least was the tariff determined by the Secretary of State since part of the policy which was announced was that the local review committee of the Parole Board was normally to take place three years before the expiry of the period necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence and the prisoner would be aware of the review. Where the tariff period was over 20 years, the prisoner would only know that the minimum period of his tariff was 20 years since in the case of a tariff of over 20 years, the case was in any event reviewed after 17 years.Mr. Howard made two relevant policy statements the first on 27 July 1993 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer, cols. 861-864). This indicated that the tariff decided upon by the Secretary of State was only "an initial view of the minimum period necessary to satisfy" the requirements of retribution and deterrence and that the Secretary of State could therefore decide "exceptionally to revise that view of the minimum period, either by reducing it, or by increasing it" if "the minimum requirements of retribution and deterrence will not have been satisfied at the expiry of the period which had previously been determined."In addition Mr. Howard identified three strands to his approval instead of two by reaffirming what had previously been said by Dame Angela Rumbold on 16 July 1991 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), cols. 309-310). The third strand is the public acceptability of the prisoner's release in order to maintain the confidence of the public in the criminal justice system.The second policy statement by Mr. Howard was made on 7 December 1994 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer, cols. 234-235). He indicated that every life sentence prisoner would have a review of his or her case by the Secretary of State after a period of 10 years' detention. In addition he announced that for those life sentence prisoners who he had decided should remain in prison for the whole of their life to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence there would be a ministerial review when the prisoner had been in custody for 25 years. He said:"The purpose of this review will be solely to consider whether the whole life tariff should be converted to a tariff of a determinateperiod. The review will be confined to the considerations of retribution and deterrence. Where appropriate, further ministerial reviews will normally take place at five-yearly intervals thereafter."It is now possible to turn to the wording of the policy statement made by Mr. Straw on 10 November 1997 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer, cols. 419-420). This was a response to the decision of the House of Lords in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, a case to which I will have to refer later. Mr. Straw having stated that he intended to continue the procedure for setting and reviewing tariffs of adult murderers set by his predecessors, went on to say:"With regard to the discretion to alter tariff, I reiterate that the view which I take (or a minister acting under my authority takes) at the beginning of a mandatory life sentence, of the period necessary to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence is an initial view of the minimum period necessary to satisfy those requirements. It therefore remains possible for me, or a future Secretary of State, exceptionally to revise that view of the minimum period, either by reducing it, or by increasing it where I, or a successor in my office, conclude that, putting aside questions of risk, the minimum requirements of retribution and deterrence will not have been satisfied at the expiry of the period which had previously been determined. The procedure for considering any increase of a tariff once set will include the opportunity for the prisoner to make representations after being informed that the Secretary of State is minded to increase tariff, and to be given reasons for any subsequent decision to increase it. So far as the potential for a reduction in tariff is concerned, I shall be open to the possibility that, in exceptional circumstances, including for example exceptional progress by the prisoner whilst in custody, a review and reduction of the tariff may be appropriate. I shall have this possibility in mind when reviewing at the 25-year point the cases of prisoners given a whole life tariff and in that respect will consider issues beyond the sole criteria of retribution and deterrence described in the answer given on 7 December 1994. Prisoners will continue to be given the opportunity to make representations and to have access to the material before me. I intend to apply these policies in respect of all tariffs for adult murderers, whether or not they were originally set before 27 July 1993 and whether or not they were originally fixed by me personally, or a minister acting on my behalf, or by or on behalf of a previous holder of my office. In the Pierson case, where the tariff has now been quashed, I intend to invite representations from the prisoner before re-setting tariff at a level which I consider appropriate. I take the opportunity to confirm that my approach on the release of adults convicted of murder once tariff has expired will reflect the policy set out in the answer given on 27 July 1993. In particular, the release of such a person will continue to depend not only on the expiry of tariff and on my being satisfied that the level of risk of his committing further imprisonable offences presented by his release is acceptably low, but also on the need to maintain publicconfidence in the system of criminal justice. The position of a prisoner subject to a mandatory life sentence continues to be distinct from that of a prisoner serving a discretionary life sentence, a decision on whose final release is a matter for the Parole Board alone."There are the following issues which arise in relation to this policy statement. (i) Is it lawful to have a whole life tariff? (ii) Is it lawful for the Secretary of State to have a policy which entitles him "exceptionally" to revise the tariff by increasing it? (iii) Is it lawful for the Secretary of State to have a policy which excludes any involvement by the Parole Board? It is not possible to separate entirely the consideration of these issues. They do overlap. However they provide a starting point and I shall seek to consider them each in turn.The whole life tariffThe concept of a whole life tariff is a relative newcomer on the penal scene. I appreciate that as a label it has attractions. The judiciary including the Lord Chief Justice have identified a category of prisoners for whom they recommend that the whole of their future life is to be the period of punishment. The Secretary of State also wants to identify a category of prisoners whose crimes are so serious that for reasons of punishment they are never to be released back to the community. However by his policy the Secretary of State now accepts this is something which he cannot achieve. He has statutory discretions to release on licence and to refer to the Parole Board which he is under a duty to consider exercising. He accepts that even in the case of whole life tariff prisoners he has to subject them to review and be prepared exceptionally to move them from this category. Furthermore, he cannot prevent his successor taking a different view and, for example, introducing a new policy removing this category from tariffs.The Home Secretary has a different statutory role from that of the judiciary. There are other aspects of the whole life tariff label to which I would draw attention which make its use questionable. It does not achieve the purposes which the tariff approach was designed to achieve. It does not assist in determining when a prisoner's case should be referred to the Parole Board, nor does it indicate when an up-to-date view should be obtained from the judiciary. Nor does it fulfil the purpose of the tariff within a sentence of life imprisonment for the prisoner. This is to establish a fixed period, which when it has been served means that the prisoner has met the requirements of retribution and deterrence. This is a matter of considerable importance to the prisoner. Finally the very fact that a whole life tariff is indeterminate in length sits uncomfortably with the concept of fixing a tariff. A tariff suggests a fixed period rather than a period which will vary with the life expectancy of the prisoner. Because a prisoner may live many years beyond his or her normal life expectancy the period of imprisonment as a punishment may be longer than was expected. It can also mean that because a prisoner is younger than a co-defendant who is more to blame, the sentence is likely to be longer for the less guilty. For these reasons, I would consider it more accurate and desirable, if there are to be a set of prisoners who for reasons of punishment and deterrence are never to be released, to describe them, as in fact I believe them to be, asnon-tariff prisoners. That is prisoners who because of the seriousness of their offence, have no fixed period set. This is not only to draw a linguistic distinction. It draws attention also to features of "a whole life" tariff which are relevant when considering the lawfulness of the policy which the present Home Secretary and his predecessor adopted.As to lawfulness, the starting point must be that the Secretary of State is clearly given a discretion not to release a prisoner on licence. If the prisoner would continue to be a risk, if he were released, that would certainly justify the Secretary of State not releasing the prisoner. If the situation was one where the Secretary of State was satisfied for good reason that the prisoner would continue to be a risk to the public for the rest of his life, it seems to me there could be no objection to his announcing this to be his position as long as he made it clear that he would be prepared to reconsider his decision at reasonable intervals in the light of the then current circumstances. If the Home Secretary is entitled to come to that conclusion with regard to a prisoner who continues to be a risk, I do not see objection in principle to the Home Secretary saying that on the information which is before him at the present time, he is satisfied that the offence which the particular prisoner has committed is so heinous that he cannot fix a period after which punishment and deterrence would not require him to be incarcerated. If this be the position it would seem to me perfectly proper as a matter of law for him to decline to fix a tariff. This is what in effect the Secretary of State has to be regarded as having done in the case of the applicant. If he refers at all to a whole life tariff that is a matter for him. However whatever the label used it has to be remembered that he must still be prepared to consider the question of release especially after the prisoner has served what would normally be regarded as a very long sentence. An alternative way and in my judgment a preferable way, of achieving the same objective would be for the Secretary of State to fix an extremely long period as the tariff. This would be more satisfactory than the course taken by the Secretary of State under his policy, because it would make clear that the Secretary of State really meant to impose the tariff which he has. It would also make it easier for the court at least to assess the reasonableness of the tariff.What is important to recognise is that whole life tariff prisoners are in fact in a class which forms an exception within the general policy for mandatory life sentence prisoners. The law accepts that a minister can have a policy which indicates how a statutory discretion will be exercised. However, it is a requirement of the law that the minister must be prepared to deal with exceptional cases exceptionally. This requirement is necessary to protect the interests of the individual who is subject to the policy but whose case has exceptional features which require special consideration which the policy may not provide. The danger which can result from not recognising that a case is exceptional is that a policy which in general is perfectly acceptable will in the exceptional case result in the statutory discretion being exercised unlawfully or unfairly. The discretion to release given to the Home Secretary imposes a duty upon him to review the position of mandatory life prisoners from time to time. The Home Secretary must not by the use of the expression "whole life tariff" deprivea prisoner of the benefit of that duty which Parliament has placed upon the Home Secretary.However despite these considerations the policy is not unlawful merely because of the use of the expression "whole life tariff."The exclusion of the Parole BoardThe next issue that it is convenient to consider is what is the effect on the lawfulness of the current policy of the fact that prisoners who have no fixed tariff will now never be referred to the Parole Board unless the Secretary of State decides exceptionally to change the whole life tariff to a fixed period tariff. Is this contrary to the intention of Parliament? Where the tariff is a fixed tariff it is, in general, perfectly reasonable to await until shortly before the expiry of the fixed tariff which has to be served to obtain the recommendation from the Parole Board.However in the case of indeterminate tariff the situation is different unless the Secretary of State decides to change the tariff. The policy could result in there never being a reference to the Parole Board. Is this what Parliament intended? Until the change made by Mr. Howard in his policy statement there would have been a reference after 17 years. He makes no mention of any reference to the Parole Board in exceptional circumstances. However this was in a context of a policy where the whole life tariff would only be reduced in the light of circumstances relating to the offence. Mr. Straw in his revised policy, is prepared to take into account when considering whether or not there are exceptional circumstances justifying a change to a fixed term policy the progress the prisoner has made. This is an acceptance that in these cases he is not only concerned with punishment. When considering the progress the prisoner has made whilst in prison, the Parole Board could make a contribution to the Secretary of State's decision. It would therefore be wrong for the Secretary of State not to be prepared to consider exercising his discretion to refer to the Parole Board though he is not obliged to refer. At the present his policy is silent as to whether he would be prepared to do this for the purposes of reviewing the whole life tariff. In this case this has already happened on 4 March 1997. The applicant was informed that the board had recommended her transfer to open prison conditions with a further review two years later. This is as positive a recommendation as the applicant could anticipate. Particularly as the Secretary of State has yet to take into account the effect on her tariff of her behaviour while in prison, this possible lacuna has not prejudiced her in this case and I am not prepared to assume that the Secretary of State is not prepared to consider referring her case to the Parole Board when this could assist.Increasing or reducing the tariffAt the time Mr. Leon Brittan made his announcement in the House of Commons on 30 November 1983 as to the adoption of the tariff policy by the Home Office, there was nothing said to suggest that tariffs would be revised or that they would be determined as being for life. In his policy statement of 27 July 1993 Mr. Howard emphasised that the view that he took at the beginning of a mandatory life sentence was an "initial" viewof the minimum period necessary to satisfy retribution and deterrence and that it remained possible for him or future Secretaries of State "exceptionally" to revise that view of the minimum period. The current policy announced by Mr. Straw therefore reflects the approach of his predecessor. However it differs from the policy of Mr. Howard in that it expressly states in relation to a potential reduction of tariff that among the circumstances taken into account would be exceptional progress by the prisoner while in custody. The progress which a prisoner made after sentence was not a factor which would be taken into account under Mr. Howard's policy when considering whether a tariff should be changed. This is made clear by the affidavit of Mr. Timothy Morris on behalf of the Home Office. In that affidavit he said:"By its very nature (being designed to reflect the requirements of retribution and deterrence for the crime), the tariff is concerned exclusively with the circumstances of the offence and the characteristics of the offender at the time of the offence. Information which comes into existence after the date of the offence can be relevant to tariff but only if it [relates] back to the circumstances as they existed at the date of the offence. Exceptional progress (including later remorse and confession) made by the offender while in custody is not per se regarded as relevant to tariff, although it is highly material to an offender's dangerousness to the public (on which the Parole Board advises)."It was this approach, confirming the information which was relevant, which Lord Bingham C.J. in the Divisional Court held to be unlawful. In his judgment the Lord Chief Justice only referred to a reduction of a mandatory life sentence but if his view as to a reduction in the tariff term is correct, as I think it is, it must also apply equally to an increase in the tariff term from a fixed term to a life term. The evidence does not throw any light on whether the view I have just expressed is accepted by the Home Secretary. However, this is not surprising in view of the agreement that the Home Secretary should consider the applicant's conduct while in prison when the outcome of the present proceedings is known. Mr. Straw's decision of 19 November 1997 was stated to be:"Subject to consideration of whether it is appropriate to reduce the tariff in your client's case by reason of any exceptional progress (on which the Home Secretary will not form a concluded view until you have had a fair opportunity to make any further written representations you may wish to make) . . ."The position therefore appears to be satisfactory, subject to it being lawful for the Secretary of State to review a tariff upwards once a tariff has been initially fixed. Here the previous decisions of the courts disclose an unsatisfactory confusing situation notwithstanding the number of occasions on which the courts have had to consider the position of prisoners subject to mandatory life sentences.The first case to which it is necessary to make reference is the decision of the House of Lords in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318. That case concerned four prisoners, only two of whom had been sentenced to lifeimprisonment. The two other prisoners were subject to determinate sentences. The prisoners had applied to the courts in consequence of the adverse effect upon them of the policy of Mr. Brittan to which I have already referred. The two prisoners serving a life sentence had until just before the announcement of the new policy, been transferred to an open prison but by the time of the announcement they had been transferred back to a closed prison. In his speech with which the other members of the House agreed, Lord Scarman referred to the fact that the prior practice in the administration of parole, "understandably nourished their hopes of release:" p. 329g. Lord Scarman went on to decide that Mr. Brittan's policy was not unlawful though it would have the effect of prisoners who were already sentenced having their date for parole postponed. He also dealt with the prisoners' legitimate expectations in these terms, at p. 338:"The post-sentence history of these two appellants, each of whom is serving a life sentence, I have already summarised. They had good reason under the practice which prevailed before the adoption of the new policy to expect release much earlier than became likely after its adoption. The doctrine of legitimate expectation has an important place in the developing law of judicial review. It is however, not necessary to explore the doctrine in this case, it is enough merely to note that a legitimate expectation can provide a sufficient interest to enable one who cannot point to the existence of a substantive right to obtain the leave of the court to apply for judicial review. These two appellants obtained leave. But their submission goes further. It is said that the refusal to except them from the new policy was an unlawful act on the part of the Secretary of State in that his decision frustrated their expectation. But what was their legitimate expectation? Given the substance and purpose of the legislative provisions governing parole, the most that a convicted prisoner can legitimately expect is that his case will be examined individually in the light of whatever policy the Secretary of State sees fit to adopt provided always that the adopted policy is a lawful exercise of the discretion conferred upon him by the statute. Any other view would entail the conclusion that the unfettered discretion conferred by the statute upon the minister can in some cases be restricted so as to hamper, or even to prevent, changes of policy. Bearing in mind the complexity of the issues which the Secretary of State has to consider and the importance of the public interest in the administration of parole I cannot think that Parliament intended the discretion to be restricted in this way." (Second emphasis added.)Mr. Fitzgerald on behalf of the applicant submits that this decision is not an insurmountable impediment to the successful outcome of this appeal. Mr. Pannick on behalf of the Home Office argues equally persuasively to the contrary. What can be said about the Findlay case is that since it has been decided, considerable strides have been made in developing the jurisprudence as to judicial review. It can also be said that the passage from the Lord Scarman speech which I have cited is based on the premise that the policy which is being introduced is lawful. What Mr. Fitzgerald is contending is the policy here is unlawful. Furthermore Lord Scarman'sremarks have to be seen in the context of the policy prior to the implementation of the tariff approach and the decision of the House of Lords in Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531 based on that approach. In addition, if a prisoner is expressly told that his tariff is "x" years, even if this is qualified by the word "initial," it is difficult to treat the legitimate expectation as being limited in the way Lord Scarman has described. This is confirmed by the citations I have already made from Doody.The next case to which reference should be made is Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Venables [1998] A.C. 407. This case did not deal with prisoners who are subject to a mandatory life sentence but with children and young persons who have been ordered to be detained during Her Majesty's pleasure. The statutory provisions and the policies which were adopted in relation to those who were ordered to be detained during Her Majesty's pleasure were closely allied to those which apply to adult offenders. Indeed it was one of the grounds on which the minors succeeded on their appeal. The policy adopted by the Home Secretary was unlawful because it precluded any regard being had to how a child progresses and matures during his detention. While the considerations that are relevant in this appeal and those that were relevant on the appeal in the Venables case are not identical, it is relevant to note that in his speech Lord Goff of Chieveley said, at p. 490:"In my opinion the only way in which the conflict can be resolved is by recognising that, if the Secretary of State implements a policy of fixing a penal element of the sentence of a mandatory life prisoner pursuant to his discretionary power under section 35, he is to this extent exercising a function which is closely analogous to a sentencing function with the effect that, when so doing, he is under a duty to act within the same constraints as a judge will act when exercising the same function."It is also relevant to note the similar remarks made by Lord Steyn and Lord Hope of Craighead. Lord Steyn described the Home Secretary in fixing a tariff as "carrying out, contrary to the constitutional principle of separation of powers, a classic judicial function" which meant that "like a sentencing judge, the Home Secretary would not act contrary to fundamental principles governing the administration of justice:" p. 526. Lord Hope made it clear that "If the Secretary of State wishes to fix a tariff for the case - in order to replace the views of the judiciary with a view of his own about the length of the minimum period - he must be careful to abide by the same rules:" p. 537. These statements were not made in respect of altering tariffs but in the context of the Secretary of State taking into account information which should have been treated as irrelevant. On this subject Lord Browne-Wilkinson took a different view and indicated that courts should be careful not to impose "judicial procedures and attitudes on what Parliament has decided should be an executive function:" p. 503. He did however earlier indicate that what had saved Mr. Brittan's policy from being unlawful was that the policy contained within it "the flexibility," in exceptional circumstances, to have regard to relevant circumstances and such circumstances included not only those factors relevant to the culpability of the offence but also "otherrelevant factors such as prison record, personal or family circumstances:" p. 497.The final case to which it is necessary to refer is Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539. In this case the courts were considering the position of a prisoner serving a life sentence where the tariff had been fixed at 20 years although he was informed that 15 years would have been appropriate to a single premeditated offence but he had committed a double murder requiring the longer period. In response to his representations, the Secretary of State subsequently accepted that the murders had been unpremeditated and part of a single incident but despite this the Secretary of State considered 20 years was still appropriate. On this approach, the Secretary of State was changing 15 years to 20 years. At first instance, the decision of the Secretary of State was quashed. The Court of Appeal allowed an appeal but the House of Lords reversed the decision of the Court of Appeal. Lord Hope of Craighead and Lord Steyn decided that the Home Secretary did not have the power to increase a tariff lawfully fixed. Lord Lloyd of Berwick took quite the opposite view. Lord Browne-Wilkinson again pointed out that Parliament having chosen to vest a discretion in a minister it should not be taken to require the minister to behave like a judge even if the discretion is of a kind normally exercised by judges. He then went on to consider whether there is any principle of construction which requires the court in certain cases to construe general words contained in a statute as being impliedly limited and he said that there was such a principle. He said, at pp. 573-574:"It is well established that Parliament does not legislate in a vacuum: statutes are drafted on the basis that the ordinary rules and principles of the common law will apply to the express statutory provisions . . . As a result, Parliament is presumed not to have intended to change the common law unless it has clearly indicated such intention either expressly or by necessary implication . . . This presumption has been applied in many different fields including the construction of statutory provisions conferring wide powers on the executive."Lord Browne-Wilkinson then refers to the implication that Parliament requires the decisions to be made in accordance with rules of natural justice. However he indicated that while he found it distasteful that a prisoner who has been told the appropriate period of punishment for his crime can then be told many years later that such punishment has been increased he went on to indicate that he could find no general principle of non-aggregation of penalties and on that basis, he then concluded that, at p. 576:"It is therefore clear that, while the law leans against any increase in penalty once imposed, there is no general principle that such an increase is contrary to law. In my judgment, therefore, there is no absolute principle against aggravation of penalties and therefore no ground for limiting the general words of section 35 so as to preclude the Home Secretary from adopting the 1993 policy . . . under which the tariff period can be increased."Lord Browne-Wilkinson made those remarks after considering Reg. v. Menocal [1980] A.C. 598, a case in which the House of Lords made it clear that the Crown Court has no power to vary or rescind a sentence except under an express statutory power. I speculate, without knowing the answer, that if the principle relied on had been expressed more broadly based on due process Lord Browne-Wilkinson might have taken a different view. This is because it is clear, in my judgment, that courts, because of the principles of fairness and due process, have never increased sentences once fixed, at least in the absence of new circumstances, without express statutory authority permitting them to do so. An appeal is different. If the process is one which includes an appeal the requirements of due process are met. The appeal must however be heard with due expedition.Lord Goff of Chieveley decided the matter in favour of the prisoner on the basis of his interpretation of the then policy. However reading his speech as a whole, I have no doubt that it was implicit in his approach, that he was accepting that the Secretary of State could adopt a policy which justified his increasing the tariff. He did not however rule out the possibility of the prisoner being able to invoke the principle of legitimate expectation notwithstanding Lord Scarman's speech in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318.Mr. Pannick submitted that under the current policy the Secretary of State or his successor would not need to find any new circumstance in order to justify his decision to increase the tariff. He could do so on any review because evaluating the previous facts afresh he recognised that his previous evaluation was in error. I can only see support for this approach in Pierson's case [1998] A.C. 539 in the speech of Lord Lloyd of Berwick, which is not supported by the other speeches. Such an approach would be arbitrary in the extreme and not in accordance with the requirement of substantive natural justice or due process or with my interpretation of the Secretary of State's own policy. This accepts that the tariff will only be increased exceptionally. That requires some exceptional circumstance. It cannot be right to regard the policy as permitting changes merely because on a numerical basis the number of cases where there is an increase is small. This would not be a rational approach. What can be an exceptional circumstance has to be judged by the Home Secretary looking at the circumstances as a whole of the individual prisoner and asking himself whether in those circumstances, it is right to regard the case as being one which because of exceptional circumstances justifies an increase. The exceptional treatment may possibly, as in Pierson, be initiated by the Secretary of State himself making a mistake but this does not derogate from the requirement of there having to be exceptional circumstances. The fact that a task is entrusted to a minister rather than a judge does not change the nature of the task, though it does enable the minister to bring to bear, when performing the task, experience and information which differ from those which will be available to a judge.If my interpretation of the policy statement is incorrect, and it purports to entitle the Secretary of State to increase a tariff without there being any change of circumstance, albeit exceptionally, I would regard the policy as being unlawful. In his submissions to the court Mr. Fitzgerald rightly placed great emphasis on a passage of Hoffmann L.J. in Reg. v. Secretaryof State for the Home Department, Ex parte McCartney, The Times, 25 May 1994; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 667 of 1994. That is a case involving a discretionary life sentence. However, Hoffmann L.J. said:". . . I think it offends against basic principles of justice that the sentence should be fixed retrospectively 15 years later by reference to the view taken of the seriousness of the offence in the circumstances then prevailing. It offends even further if the Home Secretary is, as Mr. Pannick submitted . . . [entitled to] take into account other matters such as current public confidence in the way the criminal justice system deals with the I.R.A."I would apply this passage to all life prisoners. What is critical is that we are not concerned here with a normal ministerial discretion but a discretion as to how a sentence of a court which deprives a person of his liberty is to be administered. Such a discretion has to be exercised in a manner which is peculiarly sensitive to the requirements of justice.What I have said so far indicates how I answer the three questions I have posed.The application of the policy to the applicantOn the assumption that the policy is lawful, the next question which arises is as to whether this decision of the Secretary of State is unlawful because of the manner in which he applied his policy in the case of the applicant. Here I regard it as unfortunate that so far the Secretary of State has not been able to consider all the relevant circumstances, which must include the period of imprisonment which the applicant has already served and the manner she has responded to her crimes during that period. Further, there has to be taken into account the extent to which she was led to believe that there was a finite period which she would have to serve by way of retribution and deterrence.I have already indicated that I do not regard the decision in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318 as being decisive as to whether or not the tariff which has been fixed can be departed from. It depends on the relevant facts. These can be summarised here as being as follows: in January 1985 Mr. Brittan decided upon a 30-year tariff. This however was a provisional conclusion. It was made at the same time as the provisional tariff in the case of her co-defendant was fixed at 40 years. At the time Mr. Brittan reached that view, it was anticipated that further consideration would be given to the duration of the tariff for the purposes of the next formal Parole Board review.It was apparently unusual for a tariff to be described as provisional and this was done only in a most serious case. The applicant was not aware that this provisional tariff was set at the time. However she knew that her case was being considered by the local review committee in 1979, 1982 and 1985. She says that she thought that her tariff was between 25 and 30 years because no one, as far as she was aware, had ever been recommended for any longer period. In 1985 she was told that she would not be reviewed for another five years and she was aware that her co-defendant, Ian Brady, was not to be reviewed for a further period of10 years. Her understanding was that her tariff was not more than 30 years.In July 1990 her tariff was increased to whole life by the then Home Secretary Mr. David Waddington without her knowing and on the next review in September 1990 she was told that her case would be reviewed in five years' time. In deciding to increase the tariff to that of life, the Home Secretary took into account the confession that the applicant had made to the police in February 1987 which referred to her greater involvement as well as mitigating factors.The applicant could not remember being shown Mr. Brittan's parliamentary statement of 1 March 1985 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer, cols. 309-310). This indicated that there would be a formal review after 17 years in the case of those whose tariff was set at a period of 20 years or longer but the review should not in any way imply that 20 years had been set "as the period necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence." Mr. Brittan added that he had asked the Parole Board to consider the cases of the applicant and her co-defendant but he expressly stated:"The review of these cases does not mean either that the periods of detention necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence have been completed or are near completion; or that the Parole Board will recommend the release of either prisoner; or that I would necessarily accept such a recommendation if it were made."In March 1989 the applicant petitioned the Home Office about her date of release. Not being satisfied by the reply that she received on 28 July 1989 on the following day she wrote to the Home Office a letter which contained a plea asking "WHAT IS MY TARIFF DATE, please?" She did not receive a reply and was unaware of the whole life tariff until December 1994.The applicant's letter of 29 July 1989 makes it clear how important it was for her to know what her tariff was. In future thanks to the decision in Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531 prisoners will not be kept in the dark as she was. However, the fact that she was never told of the 30 years provisional tariff, means that she is in no better position than the prisoners in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318 to contend that she had a legitimate expectation binding on the Home Office, either that she had a fixed term tariff or a fixed term tariff provisionally fixed at 30 years which prevented the Home Secretary determining that the proper tariff was a whole life tariff. If she had been told of the provisional tariff then I would distinguish the Findlay case.Equally if the applicant had been told of the provisional fixing of a tariff in January 1985, and thereafter almost 10 years were allowed to elapse before she was invited to make representations on the subject of a whole life tariff, I would have regarded it as contrary to due process or an abuse of process and substantively unfair to change the tariff. By December 1994 she had already served 28 years' imprisonment and assuming she had a tariff of 30 years then she could legitimately expect that she had served the required period to meet retribution and deterrence. If it had been suggested that the 30-year period was provisional, she would have beenentitled to respond that it ceased to be provisional as a result of the passage of time. In answer to a suggestion that to prevent the Secretary of State changing his mind would defeat the intention of Parliament, she would justifiably have been able to say that on the contrary the Secretary of State, by seeking in those circumstances to change her tariff so fundamentally, was acting contrary to the intention of Parliament. When Parliament confers a discretion on the Secretary of State, unless it uses language which indicates clearly a different intention, it can be assumed not to intend the Secretary of State to act unfairly or otherwise than in accordance with the common law principle of due process.Does it make any difference that the applicant was not aware of the fixing of the provisional 30-year tariff in the whole of the circumstances of this case? I am bound to say that this is a question which has caused me some difficulty as she had every reason to believe that she had a fixed tariff. However my conclusion is that it does make a significant difference. Due process or abuse of process is all about fairness. If a prisoner has not been told her tariff, then she is less prejudiced by the fact that before she learns of the tariff it is changed. If it is lawful for the Secretary of State to determine a whole life tariff, then in my judgment the unfairness or abuse of process only arises as a result of changing a fixed tariff to a whole life tariff when the prisoner has been told previously of the fixed tariff. In addition in this case her confession created a new situation and as the tariff was provisionally fixed, a new situation could justify an alteration in the tariff.Is the whole life tariff unreasonable?I would start my consideration of this question by recollecting that at the time her offence was committed, the norm for murder was a tariff of 12 years. It could be less than 12 years, it could be more. I also take into account that when the tariff was changed to whole life, she had already served just over 24 years and she was then of an age when it was not improbable that she could live another 30 or even 40 years. That means a possible total of 60 or 70 years in prison. In addition it was a case where her co-defendant's conduct was even more grave than hers. She had, however, made a confession which showed her involvement was greater than had previously been thought although she was alleging that she was being dominated by her co-defendant.If the announcement of a whole life tariff meant, absent fresh circumstances, that the Secretary of State had decided that she should spend possibly more than double the provisional tariff of 30 years in prison, I am bound to say I would regard the period for punishment and deterrence as being disproportionate and unreasonable, if there was to be left out of account the question of public reaction and her own behaviour in prison.On the other hand if I am right in believing that the correct interpretation of what had happened is that the Secretary of State was saying that this is such a bad case he was not going to fix a determinate tariff but would review the whole of her circumstances at appropriate intervals then I do not have the same difficulty. It seems to me with offences as horrendous as these it is perfectly reasonable for a Secretary ofState to adopt the position that this is a case which is so bad that it would not be appropriate to fix a tariff. He could add, that there might come a time when he or a successor would come to the conclusion that to release the applicant would not involve any risk to the public, would not undermine the public's confidence in the criminal justice system or result in the applicant not being sufficiently punished but, that time had not yet arrived so he would review the situation at five-yearly intervals.Mr. Fitzgerald also complains about the Home Secretary's reasons for his decision. As to this, I need say no more than I have considered the point and do not accept it. He made clear the way he was dealing with the position of her co-defendant.What then is the result? My conclusions are as follows.1. The whole life tariff is not unlawful but it is to be treated as a decision not to determine a fixed tariff for retribution and deterrence because of the seriousness of the offence.2. The current policy does not entitle the Home Secretary to increase a fixed tariff in the absence of new circumstances.3. Subject to 1 and 2 above, it was not unlawful for the present Home Secretary to fix the tariff of the applicant at whole life, that being subject to the applicant being entitled to make submissions as to the effect of her conduct during her period in prison and the Home Secretary being prepared to consider consulting the Parole Board.4. His decision was not unreasonable, on the assumption he intends now to keep her case under review and is prepared to ascertain the views of the Parole Board and the judiciary when he considers their views would assist him to come to a decision.5. He gave adequate reasons.I would dismiss this appeal.JUDGMENTBY-2: Hutchison L.JJUDGMENT-2:Hutchison L.J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgments of Lord Woolf M.R. and Judge L.J. and I agree that this appeal should be dismissed. However, given the significant differences in their approach to the problems posed by this case, I shall state my reasons. I propose to do so quite briefly.I begin by emphasising the importance of distinguishing between statutory provisions and ministerial statements of policy. This case is essentially to do with the latter. By statute, the only sentence for murder is life imprisonment but the Secretary of State is given a discretion to release a mandatory life prisoner on licence. All that the statute requires is (expressly) that before doing so, he has received a recommendation for release from the Parole Board and consulted the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge if available; and (impliedly) that he should give appropriate consideration to whether or not to refer any particular mandatory life sentence case to the Parole Board, and to their views and those of the Lord Chief Justice and trial judge. (I am not here considering compassionate grounds - section 30 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997). There can accordingly be no doubt that the statute contemplates that there may be mandatory life sentence prisoners who will never be released, and that it is the Secretary of State who has the power and the duty to decide whether such a prisoner should be released.Successive Home Secretaries have sought to spell out the policies which will guide them in the exercise of this power and duty. As one would expect (putting the matter for the moment in the most general terms) the policy statements have embodied the notion, which is both rational and humane, that a murderer should not be released until he has served a term commensurate with the gravity of his particular crime, and then only if his release would not pose a significant risk to the public. It is implicit in that approach that, ordinarily at least, a murderer who has served a commensurate term and is considered not to pose a risk will be released on licence.Mr. Leon Brittan's 1983 policy statement for the first time gave formal expression to this approach, by characterising the commensurate period as that necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence and accepting that once that period had been served the determining factor was risk to the public (Hansard (H.C. Debates), 30 November 1983, cols. 505-507). There was no mention of any further criterion to which the Secretary of State would have regard when exercising his powers.However Mr. Michael Howard in July 1993 and the present Home Secretary, Mr. Jack Straw in his policy statement of 10 November 1997 both identified a third criterion which was (I quote from Mr. Straw's statement) that release would depend "also on the need to maintain public confidence in the system of criminal justice" (Hansard (H.C. Debates), 27 July 1993, written answer, cols. 861-864 and Hansard (H.C. Debates), 10 November 1997, written answer, cols. 419-420). It is worth emphasising that it is not in reliance on this third criterion that Mr. Straw has made the decision to which, effectively, these proceedings relate. In my view we are not concerned with the legality of that part of the policy statement of November 1997 - nor indeed have we heard any argument on that topic - and I refrain from expressing any view about it. The decision we are concerned with is one to increase the tariff, and involves the increase from 30 years to life of the period assessed as being appropriate for retribution and deterrence.Like Lord Woolf M.R., I consider that the concept of a whole life tariff is one which sits uneasily with the meaning ascribed to tariff in ministerial policy statements. By definition it is an uncertain period, which in itself seems at odds with the notion of a tariff. It may also, as Lord Woolf M.R. has pointed out, bear more severely on a young than on an older offender even though both are, in terms of culpability, deserving of similar punishment. However, I am not persuaded that such difficulties justify the conclusion that a whole life tariff is in some way inherently unreasonable and I feel driven to agree with Judge L.J. that there may be cases in which the Secretary of State (without having to invoke the third strand of his policy, discussed above) is entitled to conclude that the requirements of retribution and deterrence cannot be met save by lifelong detention of the particular offender. Having said that, I would respectfully agree with the Master of the Rolls that it would be preferable if tariffs were to be expressed in terms of years even though, in the case of a very long tariff, the effect might in practice be the same.The principal issue in this case is whether the Secretary of State's decision of 19 November 1997 to affirm his immediate predecessor's wholelife tariff was lawful. This in turn depends on whether Mr. Howard's decision of 3 February 1997 to set the applicant's tariff afresh at whole life was lawful. In concluding, in respectful agreement with Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J. and with Lord Woolf M.R. and Judge L.J. that those decisions were lawful I make the following observations.1. Unlike Judge L.J., I do not regard the matter as being determined by the decision of the House of Lords in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318. I agree with the observations of Lord Woolf M.R. in regard to that authority, which seems to me in any event to be distinguishable on the ground that it was not a case which concerned the alteration of a tariff but rather the unfortunate consequences (for the prisoners) of Mr. Brittan's lawful new policy as to release on parole.2. I consider that the debate as to whether the Home Secretary is exercising a quasi-judicial function or one analogous to sentencing is comparatively sterile. There is no absolute principle that sentences cannot be increased, as Judge L.J. has demonstrated: but it cannot be doubted that when the Home Secretary (who in this context is to be regarded not as an individual but as the holder of a continuing office) makes a decision in the light of a full appreciation of the relevant facts, he is, under his policy statement, doing something which in a very real sense approximates to a sentence because it formally tells the prisoner (in broad terms) the length of time he is likely to have to serve.3. Leaving on one side for the moment the peculiarity of the present case that the tariff was expressed to be provisional, it seems to me that - at any rate in a case where the tariff has not been communicated to the prisoner - the reservation by the Secretary of State of a right exceptionally to revise tariffs is not unlawful. This conclusion follows in my view from the decision in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, as to which I, like Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J., regard it as being part of the reasoning of Lord Hope and Lord Steyn that the tariff there in issue had been both fixed and communicated. However, I am in full agreement with Lord Woolf M.R. that current policy, properly interpreted, does not entitle the Secretary of State to increase a tariff which has already been fixed, whether by himself or a predecessor, unless there has been a change in the circumstances. For example, such a change could be said to have occurred where, as here, new facts became known to the Secretary of State after he had set the original tariff. A decision to vary a tariff which has been set after due consideration in the light of all material facts and communicated and has not been characterised as provisional, simply because the current office holder thought it was too short, ought not to be countenanced. It would fly in the face of the published policy, disappoint legitimate expectations and be unfair and unreasonable.4. Because the applicant's tariff had been expressed to be provisional as well as because it had not been communicated to her and because there has been a significant change in the circumstances bearing on her culpability, I do not consider that her challenge to the legality of the decision to increase the tariff to life can succeed.5. I agree with what Lord Woolf M.R. has said as to legitimate expectation.6. While the decision can be said to be severe, I do not consider that it can be characterised as perverse in the Wednesbury sense (Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 K.B. 223).7. In my view the Secretary of State has given adequate reasons for his decision.I would therefore dismiss this appeal.JUDGMENTBY-3: Judge L.JJUDGMENT-3:Judge L.J: On 6 May 1966, when she was 23 years old, Myra Hindley and Ian Brady were convicted at Chester Assizes of the murders of Edward Evans and Lesley Ann Downey, a girl aged 10 years, and of being an accessory after the fact to the murder by Ian Brady of John Kilbride. She was acquitted of participation in his murder. She was sentenced to life imprisonment on each count of murder and seven years' imprisonment for her involvement in the death of John Kilbride.The case presented by the Crown was that Brady "was the initiator of these crimes, and the actual killer;" the applicant was "his willing accomplice, corrupted and dominated by him" (per Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J. in his judgment in the Divisional Court [1998] Q.B. 751, 760.)The assessment of the trial judge (Fenton Atkinson J.) was contained in a letter to the Home Secretary dated 8 May 1966. He said about the applicant:"At present she is as deeply corrupted as Brady . . . One watched them day after day, looking for the smallest flicker of an expression indicating some shame or regret or realisation of the horror of what was being unfolded in the evidence, but it never came. There can be no doubt they tortured and later killed children because they enjoyed it and I am convinced that they regard those who are horrified by such conduct as 'morons' and beneath contempt."These observations no doubt carried, and still carry, particular weight with every Home Secretary who subsequently considered the case, not only because they represented the judgment of the trial judge who had seen both the applicant and Brady over a prolonged period, but also because the judge was at pains to recognise some distinction between them. He observed that: "Brady is wicked beyond belief without hope of redemption (short of a miracle), I cannot feel that the same is necessarily true of Hindley once she is removed from his influence." Events over 20 years later in the form of a narrative confession by the applicant of complicity in the crimes to which she had pleaded not guilty, and to other earlier murders with which she had not been charged, underlined the accuracy of the trial judge's observations. All that however lay in the future and it will be necessary to examine the contents of the narrative given by the applicant in 1987 in the context of the submission by Mr. Edward Fitzgerald on her behalf that the confession included, in addition, important matters of mitigation.The sentence of life imprisonment imposed by Fenton Atkinson J. on Brady and the applicant followed the mandatory requirements of the then newly enacted Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965, section 1(1) of which provides: "a person convicted of murder shall . . . be sentenced toimprisonment for life." Despite examination in argument of what was said contemporaneously during the course of parliamentary debates by adherents of passionately held but contradictory beliefs about the proposal to abolish the death penalty, the analysis added nothing to the language of the section which is simple and clear. On conviction of murder only one sentence is permitted. The sentence of life imprisonment is obligatory, or mandatory. The sentence imposed by Fenton Atkinson J. provided and remains the legal foundation for the applicant's continued imprisonment.Fenton Atkinson J. did not exercise the power provided by section 1(2) of the Act and recommend the period of custody which should elapse before the applicant's release. Whether he had or not, the sentence would have remained imprisonment for life, and any recommendation would have been no more than that, to be accepted or rejected by the Home Secretary. Shortly after the applicant began to serve her sentence, section 61(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967 came into force, providing that in cases of mandatory life imprisonment the Secretary of State, on the recommendation of the Parole Board and after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge, if available, might release such a prisoner on licence. The power therefore was subject to a positive recommendation from the Parole Board and consultation (but not the agreement) of the Lord Chief Justice and the trial judge. So far as adults were concerned, and subject to modifications in the statutory provisions relating to release on licence which had no relevance to a mandatory life sentence, these remained the appropriate statutory requirements until the Criminal Justice Act 1991 came into force on 1 October 1992.Part II of the Act of 1991 created a new statutory framework governing the early release of prisoners generally. In summary, section 33 imposed a duty on the Home Secretary to release short term and long term prisoners after specified proportions of their terms of imprisonment had been served, and section 35(1) granted him the power to release a long term prisoner after a shorter period than that specified in section 33. In response to the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in Thynne v. United Kingdom (1990) 13 E.H.R.R. 666 a duty to release a prisoner serving a discretionary life sentence was imposed on the Home Secretary by section 34. The precise operation of this section does not require detailed analysis. For effective purposes once such a prisoner has completed the penal part of his sentence determined by the court, and assuming that the Parole Board directs release, he can no longer be detained. The Home Secretary cannot increase the period to be served for retribution and deterrence. That period was fixed by the sentencing judge. The essential question to be decided when the penal period has elapsed is whether the prisoner represents a risk to the public, something about which a trial judge cannot safely form a concluded view at the time he imposes sentence.In contrast, for effective purposes, the power to release a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence continued unchanged. Section 35 provided:"(2) If recommended to do so by the board, the Secretary of State may, after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice together with the trial judge if available, release on licence a life prisoner who is not a discretionary life prisoner. (3) The board shall not make arecommendation under subsection (2) above unless the Secretary of State has referred the particular case, or the class of case to which that case belongs, to the board for its advice."These provisions remained effective until 1 October 1997 when sections 28 to 34 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 were brought into force. The further modifications were designed to comply with the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in Hussain v. United Kingdom (1996) 22 E.H.R.R. 1, a case concerning a young offender sentenced to a mandatory term of detention during Her Majesty's pleasure, but had no practical impact on the position of adults serving a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment.Throughout the time when the applicant has been in custody the effect of the relevant statutory provisions has been that the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment could indeed mean what it said, that is, the whole of the remainder of the prisoner's natural life, however long that might be. This sentence was imposed on her by the trial judge, as required by law, without statutory exceptions, and without regard to any personal mitigation. Even when murder is committed in circumstances with which a significant proportion of the public would have profound sympathy (for example, a genuine "mercy" killing at the exhortation of a pain riddled, terminally ill, beloved spouse, as a final gesture of love) the law must take its course. Whether the mandatory life sentence is appropriate in every case of murder is not in question in this appeal. At present it covers the entire spectrum of criminal culpability. The injustice of requiring that every convicted murderer should serve the same period in custody, irrespective of his true culpability, has at least in part been alleviated by the now well established practice of assessing the minimum period of imprisonment appropriate to satisfy the penal elements in the sentence.Three critical distinctions between the mandatory and discretionary life sentence remain. First, the sentencing judge does not assess the penal period: nor does the Lord Chief Justice. They make recommendations. They do not pass a sentence which incorporates their recommendations. The Home Secretary remains responsible for the assessment and application of the penal period. Second, the position of the Parole Board is much more constrained. It must await a reference by the Home Secretary before making a recommendation, and it cannot direct release. Third, the Secretary of State is not under a duty to order release. As Lord Mustill emphasised in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, this discretionary power has been left by Parliament to the Home Secretary.The present appeal is not concerned with the circumstances in which the Home Secretary may decide whether to exercise his power to order release after the appropriate penal period has been served when, for example, considerations of continuing risk or dangerousness, or public confidence in the administration of criminal justice, may bear on his decision. The single issue is the lawfulness of his decision that irrespective of any such considerations, Myra Hindley should be subject to a penal element or tariff period which should endure for the rest of her lifeIn the Divisional Court Lord Bingham C.J. rejected the argument that it was unlawful for such a whole life tariff ever to be imposed. He observed [1998] Q.B. 751, 769:"I cannot for my part accept that argument. I can see no reason, in principle, why a crime or crimes, if sufficiently heinous, should not be regarded as deserving lifelong incarceration for purposes of pure punishment. One can readily accept that in requiring a sentence of imprisonment for life on those convicted of murder Parliament did not intend the sentence to mean what it said in all, or even a majority, of cases, but there is nothing to suggest that Parliament intended that it should never (even leaving risk considerations aside) mean what it said. When, in section 29 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, Parliament again conferred a wide discretion on the Home Secretary to release mandatory life sentence prisoners, it did so in the knowledge (from Mr. Howard's statement of 7 December 1994) that some such prisoners were subject to whole life tariffs. Successive Lord Chief Justices have regarded such a tariff as lawful, and I share their view."I respectfully agree. There is no value in further elaboration. The language of the statute is clear. Even when the judge in open court expressly states the period that he recommends should be served before release is considered, this does not form part of the sentence or determine the relevant penal element. The sentence is life imprisonment. In my judgment the possibility remains that for the purposes of deterrence and punishment alone the criminal culpability involved in some cases of murder may lawfully permit imprisonment for life in accordance with the actual sentence pronounced by the trial judge.It was not suggested that the Home Secretary's power to order, or refuse, release may be exercised capriciously, and indeed Mr. David Pannick readily conceded on behalf of the Secretary of State that, in the light of subsequent decisions in the House of Lords, it was no longer appropriate to regard his discretion as "unfettered," the word used by Lord Scarman in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, 332. In the sensible exercise of the Home Secretary's power, attention would no doubt be paid to the value of a reasonable degree of consistency, not least so that (ignoring the element of future risk) different persons convicted of murder in roughly similar circumstances should not be incarcerated for significantly disparate periods, and in the interests of humane prison management for prisoners, for whom it is reasonable to provide at least some general idea of the prospect of eventual release. Throughout the decades of the applicant's incarceration the practices and policies of Home Secretaries have developed and changed, sometimes on the basis of a perceived public interest, sometimes in response to the decisions of the courts, critical of some particular facet of the then current policy. Each change has no doubt had its effect on a significant number of prisoners. Once alerted to any new policy prisoners will inevitably reflect on the personal consequences of the changes, and almost equally inevitably, construe them in the manner most favourable to themselves. Subsequent changes in policy with adverse rather than advantageous personal consequences are bound severely to disappoint, dashing hopes sometimes reasonably based on the earlier policy.This is critical to the main complaint advanced by Mr. Fitzgerald that, even if a whole life sentence were permissible as a matter of law, it was unlawful for the Home Secretary to order it in the case of the applicant as it involved an increase in the tariff which had already been set. He submitted, in my judgment rightly, and indeed consistently with the approach of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in Reg. v. Whittaker [1967] Crim.L.R. 431, that the replacement of a determinate period of whatever length with a whole life tariff represents an increase in sentence. Although there are a number of strands to this argument, Mr. Fitzgerald naturally focused his attention on policy changes which had adverse rather than favourable consequences for existing prisoners, and indeed, as I understood him, accepted that the prisoner might take advantage of a beneficial change in policy. If he is right, policy changes during the course of the progress of a sentence should not impact adversely on prisoners currently serving mandatory life sentences, but apply only to those on whom such sentences are imposed after the relevant policy comes into effect. Therefore the crucial question for consideration is whether the introduction of a new policy by the Home Secretary should be limited in its application to those prisoners sentenced after the announcement of the policy, or whether it extends to all prisoners including those currently serving their sentences.In In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, two of the four appellants, Hogben and Honeyman, were convicted of murder, and in accordance with section 1 of the Act of 1965, sentenced to life imprisonment. After excellent reports from prison they were transferred to an open prison, and under the practice then in operation, their hopes of release were "understandably nourished." Each anticipated that release on parole would follow in the "not too distant future." In October 1983, on the day before the Home Secretary announced a change of policy, they were returned to a closed prison. The effect of the change of policy on them was "shattering:" p. 329. Under the earlier practice they "had good reason . . . to expect release much earlier than became likely after its adoption:" p. 338.Having been announced at a party conference the relevant policy was repeated in Parliament (Hansard (H.C. Debates), 30 November 1983, written answer, cols. 505-507). Its effect on the parole arrangements for those serving sentences for "offences of violence or drug trafficking" was increased stringency, the terms of custody to be served by such prisoners being longer than previously anticipated. The new policy was expressly directed to those already serving sentences.For life sentence prisoners new procedures for separating the penal element from risk considerations were introduced. In this policy statement the Home Secretary said nothing about whole life tariffs in respect of the penal element of mandatory life sentences. That concept lay in the future. Although he decided that prisoners who had already been given "a provisional date of release" would be unaffected by the ne w arrangements, Hogben and Honeyman, and two other prisoners, were adversely affected because their "release in the relatively near future would not have accorded with my view of the gravity of their offences." In practical terms the then Home Secretary was applying his own judgment to and increasing the penal element in their sentences.It was argued that the new policy was unlawful and that the four prisoners should have been excepted from it. The submission was rejected in the House of Lords in a speech by Lord Scarman with which each member of the House agreed. To have accepted the submission would have involved hampering or preventing ministerial changes of policy. That was not the intention of Parliament.Some factual distinctions between the applicant and the unsuccessful appellants in Findlay can be identified. In particular, in 1982 and 1983, when each was transferred to an open prison no formal tariff system was in operation. However the reality is that Hogben and Honeyman reasonably believed that their period in custody was shortly coming to an end and their expectations were suddenly dashed by change of policy. The application of the new policy meant that, close to their anticipated dates of release, their periods in custody were lengthened. Although more stark, in principle the applicant's situation cannot reasonably be distinguished.Mr. Fitzgerald suggested that, if not distinguishable, In re Findlay had been rendered obsolete or had been overruled by subsequent decisions in the House of Lords, which had considered the acceptable practices to be followed on two subsequent occasions in the context of mandatory sentences life imprisonment (Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531 and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539) and detention during Her Majesty's pleasure under section 53(1) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933, as substituted by section 1(5) of the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965 (Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Venables [1998] A.C. 407). In re Findlay was cited in all three cases.In Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, in a speech with which each member of the House of Lords agreed, Lord Mustill concluded that In re Findlay did not preclude the courts from considering whether the requirements of fairness might not result in the creation of "new rights" for prisoners, but cautioned "that Parliament has entrusted not only the making of the decision but also the choice as to how the decision is made" to the Home Secretary (p. 561) and warned himself that the courts should not "impose on a statutory general discretion constraints which Parliament has chosen not to create:" p. 562.The policy of fixing a penal element was not called into question, but the broad discretion of the Home Secretary did not permit him to act contrary to basic principles of "fairness," assessed in the context of the statute creating the discretion and "the shape of the legal and administrative system within which the decision is taken" (p. 560). Lord Mustill touched on a consideration, developed in subsequent cases, that the assessment of the penal element by the Home Secretary "begins to look much more like an orthodox sentencing exercise," than the broad implementation of a discretionary power: p. 557.The next case to reach the House of Lords was Ex parte Venables [1998] A.C. 407. Argument was concluded on 30 January 1997 and judgment reserved, and shortly afterwards, on 10 March the House of Lords, identically constituted, began the hearing of the appeal in Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539. Next day, 11 March, judgment was reserved. Thespeeches in Ex parte Venables became available on 12 June: those in Ex parte Pierson, on 24 July. The two decisions underlined the rapidly developing features in this area of the law, and a divergence of views emerged.The essential feature of the decision in Ex parte Venables was that a sentence of detention during Her Majesty's pleasure under section 53(1) of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 was not to be equated with a mandatory life sentence imposed for murder on an adult. Lord Steyn, at p. 524, assumed without deciding, that"the Home Secretary was entitled to apply a 'practice' that a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence has forfeited his life to the state and that the 'presumption' must be that the prisoner will spend the rest of his days in prison."The obligation on the Home Secretary to approach the assessment of the tariff period as a sentencing decision was underlined by Lord Goff of Chieveley, at p. 490:"if the Secretary of State implements a policy of fixing a penal element of the sentence of a mandatory life prisoner pursuant to his discretionary power under section 35 [of the Criminal Justice Act 1991], he is to this extent exercising a function which is closely analogous to a sentencing function with the effect that, when so doing, he is under a duty to act within the same constraints as a judge will act when exercising the same function."Both Lord Steyn and Lord Hope of Craighead applied the same principle, Lord Steyn referring to it as a "classic judicial function" (p. 526), Lord Hope identifying "the characteristics of an orthodox judicial exercise:" p. 537. Therefore in making his decision about the penal period the Home Secretary was required to ignore, as sentencing judges must ignore, public clamour intended to influence his decision. In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318 did not arise for consideration, nor did the question whether new policies apply to existing prisoners, or solely to prisoners subsequently sentenced.In Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539 the facts briefly were that in 1988, after Pierson was convicted of two murders on a single occasion, the Home Secretary fixed at 20 years the appropriate period for retribution and detention before release could be considered. In doing so he rejected the recommendations of the trial judge and the Lord Chief Justice. In July 1993, following the decision in Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, he informed Pierson of his conclusion, justifying it on the basis that although 15 years would have been an appropriate period for a single premeditated offence, Pierson had committed two murders. However after considering representations on Pierson's behalf he accepted that the crimes had been unpremeditated and formed part of a single incident. Despite this conclusion he adhered to his earlier view: the appropriate period remained 20 years.Pierson sought judicial review on the basis of irrationality. He was successful before the judge, but the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal by the Secretary of State. Pierson's appeal to the House of Lords wassuccessful. In the Court of Appeal Mr. Fitzgerald for Pierson argued that In re Findlay no longer applied (p. 543) and Mr. Pannick responded by contending that it had not been displaced and remained good law: p. 544. Both counsel cited In re Findlay in the House of Lords, no doubt to similar effect.Mr. Fitzgerald also argued for what was described as the "non-aggravation principle of sentencing," that "the same sentencing authority should not aggravate or increase its own punishment simply because it subsequently reappraises the gravity of the offence:" p. 559. This submission had been rejected by the Court of Appeal. In the judgment of the court handed down by Sir Thomas Bingham M.R., in December 1995, it was observed, at p. 555:"The court cannot cut down the wide discretion conferred by Parliament by attaching non-statutory conditions not required by procedural fairness to its exercise. The Home Secretary has done no more than indicate that the power to increase a penal term will only be exercised exceptionally. That can, we think, mean no more than that the power to increase will be exercised by way of exception to the general rule that a term once fixed will not be altered. It may also mean that the power will be exercised infrequently. The Home Secretary has not defined or restricted the occasions upon which he will see fit to depart from the general rule and we do not see how this court, consistently with statute and the Doody case, can take upon itself to do so. If, by way of exception to the general rule that a penal term once fixed remains fixed, the Home Secretary revises upwards a term fixed by his predecessor (which is only 'an initial view') on the ground that it does not adequately meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence, there is nothing in law to stop him."At the risk of inadequately paraphrasing him, Lord Goff of Chieveley concluded that the appeal should be allowed on the basis that the penal element in Pierson's sentence was fixed in accordance with the Home Secretary's policy announced on 23 July 1987 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer, cols. 347-349). Its effect was that Pierson would expect, save in exceptional circumstances, that the penal element in his tariff would not be increased. At the outset of the argument the Home Secretary maintained that he had not in fact increased it. Plainly he had. Having accepted the absence of premeditation, he failed to reduce the 20-year period arrived at on the basis that the offences had been premeditated, an aggravating feature without which Pierson had been informed that the tariff period would have been 15 years. He sought then to argue that he was acting in accordance with a subsequent policy, declared on 27 July 1993 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer, cols. 861-864). The relevant passage reads:"I take this opportunity to emphasise that the view which I or a minister acting under my authority takes, at the beginning of a mandatory life sentence, of the period necessary to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence is an initial view of the minimum period necessary to satisfy those requirements. It therefore remains possible for me, or a future Secretary of State, exceptionallyto revise that view of the minimum period, either by reducing it, or by increasing it where I, or a successor in my office, concludes that, putting aside questions of risk, the minimum requirements of retribution and deterrence will not have been satisfied at the expiry of the period which had previously been determined."Lord Goff concluded that this policy had no application to Pierson's case and held that the Home Secretary's re-affirmation of the 20-year period was unlawful. He did not however express doubts about the lawfulness of the policy dated 27 July 1993, nor found his conclusion on the proposition that In re Findlay was obsolete. His language is to the opposite effect. He said, at p. 568:"On the basis of that statement [that is, the statement dated 23 July 1987] the applicant would expect that the penal element so fixed would not (apart from the exceptional circumstance, which is not material in the present case) be increased. That expectation was, however, liable to be displaced in the event of a new policy being adopted by the Secretary of State which was inconsistent with it: see In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, 338, per Lord Scarman."He later added, at p. 569:"The Secretary of State did not claim to be entitled to depart from the policy applicable in the applicant's case. Had he done so, the question would have arisen whether the applicant could invoke the principle of legitimate expectation in the light of Lord Scarman's speech in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, 338."This is not language appropriate for indicating an intention to distinguish or overrule a previous decision of their Lordships' House. Moreover, subject to a possible argument about legitimate expectation, it acknowledged that a new policy would apply to existing prisoners.Lord Browne-Wilkinson applied the principle in In re Findlay. After reciting Lord Scarman's observation about the legitimate expectation of a convicted prisoner, he said, at p. 572:"The question in this case, therefore, is whether the discretion conferred by section 35 of the Act of 1991 authorised the Home Secretary to adopt the 1993 policy under which he fixes the period appropriate for punishment and, in addition, retains the right to increase the period fixed for punishment at a later date."He concluded that it did.Lord Lloyd of Berwick also referred expressly to In re Findlay, quoting the same passage from the speech of Lord Scarman as Lord Browne-Wilkinson. In re Findlay had decided the question that even if a date for release "has been set, a prisoner can have no legitimate expectation that it will not be deferred:" [1998] A.C. 539, 581. Although both Lord Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Lloyd recognised the unfairness of a policy which authorised an increase in the period of custody of which the prisoner had already been informed, each concluded that the Home Secretary was permitted to operate such a policy.Lord Steyn did not expressly consider In re Findlay. He based his consideration "on the proposition that the Home Secretary has no generalpower to increase a tariff fixed and communicated:" p. 592. Lord Hope of Craighead considered that the principle continued to apply to what he described, at p. 601, "as a legitimate exercise of an administrative discretion," but expressed concern at rigidity in its application and rejected it as providing a proper basis for any general power permitting an increase in sentence where a more lenient sentence had been fixed and communicated to the prisoner:"the decision to increase the minimum period was . . . made in the belief, which I consider to be erroneous, that it was within the power of the Home Secretary to increase the minimum period simply because he disagreed with the view formed by his predecessor about the appropriate level of punishment:" p. 604.While Lord Steyn left open the question whether the power to increase sentence might be exercised in exceptional or special circumstances, Lord Hope concluded that even after the tariff decision had been issued and communicated, in exceptional circumstances, it might nevertheless properly be increased. This view, consistent with Lord Goff's observations, was plainly implicit in the conclusions of Lord Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Lloyd.In my judgment the speeches in Ex parte Pierson do not sustain the argument that In re Findlay is obsolete or undermined. Indeed I doubt whether the House of Lords would consider it appropriate for an inferior court so to treat its earlier decisions where the House itself had the opportunity to say so expressly, and did not do so. The reasoning which most clearly supports this proposition is found in the speech of Lord Steyn. Lord Hope, too, plainly regarded the principle in In re Findlay as too narrow to permit the alteration of the tariff period in the circumstances which obtained in Ex parte Pierson. Yet neither suggested that the individual cases with which In re Findlay was concerned - in particular Hogben and Honeyman - would have been decided differently as a result either of subsequent judicial development of the principles relating to legitimate expectation, or the introduction of the tariff system and the subsequent identification of the close similarity between fixing the tariff and the sentencing process. The distinction between Pierson, in whose case the tariff was fixed and communicated, and despite a demonstrable misconception of the facts by the Home Secretary, nevertheless maintained without any appropriate discount to allow for the manifest error, and Hogben and Honeyman, is that despite any reasonable anticipation they may have entertained, their dates for release had never been formally notified to them.Lord Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Lloyd applied the Findlay principle, and Lord Goff appears to have endorsed it. This was consistent with the views of the Court of Appeal. Each of them accepted that new policies would apply to existing prisoners, and the objections of Lord Steyn and Lord Hope were predicated on the proposition that the new policy would indeed apply to prisoners currently serving mandatory life sentences, and for that reason, was required to measure up to the appropriate minimum requirements of fairness and compliance with proper sentencing principles.Despite their personal distaste for the general unfairness of an effective increase in the tariff neither Lord Browne-Wilkinson nor Lord Lloyd was prepared to disapply the policy or treat it as unlawful, and neither accepted that there was a general principle of "non-aggravation" of penalties.No detailed argument on Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Stafford [1999] 2 A.C. 38 was addressed to us. It is necessary only to notice that Stafford's challenge to the lawfulness of the Home Secretary's decision to detain him after the expiry of the penal element of the mandatory life sentence failed. Although the introduction and development of policies relating to the fixing of a penal tariff and the close analogy with judicial sentencing decisions was again underlined, Ex parte Stafford does not suggest that In re Findlay had been or was overruled.On the foundation of the speeches of Lord Steyn and Lord Hope in Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, Mr. Fitzgerald argued that the decision to raise the applicant's penal period to a whole life tariff defeated the legitimate expectation created in her by the overall conduct of the Home Office and the Parole Board over the years.I shall not repeat Lord Bingham C.J.'s summary of the facts which led to the conclusion that this expectation was not based on the fixing and communication to her of any tariff. The applicant was sentenced to life imprisonment before the concept of a penal tariff existed. So no tariff was fixed. No doubt in common with all prisoners who were then sentenced to a mandatory term of life imprisonment, she anticipated that the time would eventually come when she would be released. Once the tariff system was introduced she herself was understandably anxious to discover the level at which her personal tariff had been set. That indeed was what she asked "in the plainest possible English," in the context of the policy statement of 23 July 1987, at the end of July 1989, "WHAT IS MY TARIFF DATE, please?" This question demonstrates that whether or not she believed that a tariff had been fixed, it had never been communicated to her. Nothing said or done thereafter by the Home Secretary could have led her to conclude that she had, at last, from her point of view, been given the information and assurance she had been so desperately seeking.The concept of legitimate expectation has continued to develop since Lord Scarman referred to it in the course of In re Findlay: so for that matter has the approach of the court to the exercise by the Home Secretary of his powers under the legislation affecting mandatory life prisoners. Nevertheless neither Lord Steyn nor Lord Hope based his objection to the decision by the Home Secretary in Ex parte Pierson on the general concept of legitimate expectation, but rather focused on the specific features of a fixed and communicated, quasi judicial, sentencing decision. If, absent these features, Pierson's appeal would have been allowed, it is difficult to see why they were mentioned and the impact of judicial developments in this area of law on the cases of Hogben and Honeyman was not addressed. In my judgment it is not possible for this court to progress from the particular features which led Lord Steyn and Lord Hope in Ex parte Pierson to express themselves as they did, deprecating an increase in a tariff which had already been fixed and notified, to the conclusion that as a matter of principle it was unlawful for a whole life tariff to be applied tothe applicant because she had not previously been warned of the risk that such an assessment might one day be made.Mr. Fitzgerald's argument, carried to its logical conclusion, means that since the introduction of the policy of assessing the penal tariff the mandatory sentence of life imprisonment under the Act of 1965 forms but the first, public, part of the sentencing process, the second, a separate, private, sentencing decision, thereafter immutable upwards, but not downwards, reached by the Home Secretary. Despite the similarities between the two processes, and the importance of the Home Secretary observing proper sentencing principles when making his determination, the processes are analogous, not identical. In particular, unlike the sentence imposed by the judge, there is no provision for an appeal against sentence, and no hierarchy of courts to reconsider his determination. Subject to judicial review if he acts unlawfully, or in breach of his own policy, or for an impermissible consideration or improper motive, or indeed irrationally, the Home Secretary is also answerable to Parliament, both for current policies and their development and application generally, and by way of exception, in individual cases. In these ways, but not by way of appeal against a sentencing decision, the continuing process by which the Home Secretary considers and monitors each mandatory life sentence is kept under review. Recognition of these principles underlines In re Findlay and the subsequent development of this area of the law in the House of Lords.If the applicant had in fact been given notice of her tariff, or if I am wrong about the limited application in this context of the speeches of Lord Steyn and Lord Hope, then the validity of the current policy of 10 November 1997 would arise for consideration (Hansard (H.C. Debates), written answer, cols. 419-420). The policy enables the Home Secretary to examine the tariff period after it has been set and:"exceptionally to revise . . . the minimum period . . . by increasing it where I, or a successor in my office, conclude that, putting aside questions of risk, the minimum requirements of retribution and deterrence will not have been satisfied at the expiry of the period which had previously been determined."The procedures require notification to the prisoner of any proposal to increase the tariff, and for reasons to be given for any subsequent decision to do so. The starting point is that the tariff period should not be increased. It may only be revised upwards, "exceptionally." Any revision must be justified with reasons. Therefore the policy itself prevents the Home Secretary from lengthening the tariff period on a personal whim, or in response to clamour of the kind criticised in Ex parte Venables [1998] A.C. 407, but, consistently with the views of Lord Goff and Lord Hope, and the implied support of Lord Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Lloyd in Ex parte Pierson, permits an increase in the tariff period in exceptional circumstances. As reasons must be given for any exceptional decisions they would be susceptible to judicial review: so would a decision for which reasons were not given. In my judgment this policy, with its express, and significant, limitations on the authority of the Home Secretary to alter tariff periods, is lawful.In this context two further strands of Mr. Fitzgerald's submissions require specific attention. First, he re-argued the principle of "non-aggravation" about which there had been emphatic disagreement in the House of Lords in Ex parte Pierson.Before the enactment of the Criminal Appeal Act 1907 no proper mechanism for dealing with appeals against sentence imposed at quarter sessions or assizes existed. The pressure, and conflicting views, which eventually led to the procedures enacted in the Act of 1907 are illuminatingly set out in the paper published in 1979 by Dr. David Thomas of the Institute of Criminology at the University of Cambridge, "Constraints on Judgment, The Search for Structured Discretion in Sentencing 1860-1910," at pp. 75 et seq. He identifies a significant body of opinion in favour of permitting what eventually became the Court of Criminal Appeal to have the power to increase sentences, both to encourage consistency, and to reduce the perceived injustice of an inadequate sentence. In due course the Court of Criminal Appeal was granted jurisdiction both to reduce and to increase sentence on appeal. The power to increase sentence survived for over half a century. It was used very infrequently, but regularly. On occasions determinate sentences were increased to life imprisonment (for example, Reg. v. Holmes [1955] Crim. L.R. 578). So far as quarter sessions and assizes were concerned this power was abolished by the Criminal Appeal Act 1966.The Report of the Interdepartmental Committee on the Court of Criminal Appeal (1965) (Cmnd. 2755), chaired by Lord Donovan, which recommended its abolition, concluded, at p. 47, para. 204:"that the undesirable features inseparable from the existence of the present power to increase sentence outweigh the benefit resulting from the circumstance that in a very few cases each year an adequate sentence is substituted for an inadequate one. The extent to which the power operates as a deterrent against frivolous appeals cannot, in the absence of experience, be reliably estimated. The effect of the power as a means of avoiding disparity of sentence is quite negligible. In these circumstances we think the power should be abolished, if only experimentally. If this were to lead to a flood of unmeritorious appeals against sentence the matter could be reviewed."Given the Committee's powerful antipathy to the "idea that the prosecution should be able to appeal against the sentence [imposed] at trial" (p. 45, para. 196) this last observation does not suggest that the Committee identified any sentencing principle of "non-aggravation." Not very much more than 20 years later, the objections of the Committee notwithstanding, section 36 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 permitted the prosecution (through the Attorney-General) to appeal against "unduly lenient" sentences in specified offences. The Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) cannot increase sentence on an appeal by the prisoner, but may do so on the application of the Attorney-General under the Act of 1988. Despite stringent safeguards, and in particular a limited period in which an application may be started, there is now nothing unusual about the replacement of an unduly lenient determinate sentence with a discretionary sentence of life imprisonment. (For recent examples, see Attorney-General'sReference (No. 6 of 1993) (1993) 15 Cr.App.R.(S.) 375 and Attorney-General's Reference (No. 76 of 1995) [1997] 1 Cr.App.R.(S.) 81). Therefore throughout most of the period since the creation of a system for appeals against sentence, the process has included a power to increase sentence, formerly when deciding an appeal by a defendant seeking a reduction of sentence, and presently, on application by the prosecution, irrespective of any appeal by the defendant.In the meantime the power of the Crown Court to increase sentence on an appeal from the magistrates has remained unchanged, and indeed was confirmed by section 48(4) of the Supreme Court Act 1981. The only relevant limitation is that the power must not exceed that which the magistrates had jurisdiction to impose.Mr. Fitzgerald rightly emphasised that, save in exceptional circumstances, the power to increase sentence was not and is not open to a court of equal jurisdiction. The former common law power by which a sentence might be increased at any date until the end of the assize or sitting of the quarter sessions, was preserved in the Crown Court by section 11 of the Courts Act 1971 (now section 47(2) of the Supreme Court Act 1981). Sentences may be varied or rescinded within 28 days after they have been passed. Thereafter a Crown Court judge cannot alter the sentence. He is functus: Reg. v. Menocal [1980] A.C. 598. This power would only be exercised to order an increase in sentence in exceptional circumstances: similarly, with the power of the Crown Court to increase the sentence imposed by the magistrates. Without the benefit of the opinions of Lord Steyn and Lord Hope, I should have unhesitatingly rejected Mr. Fitzgerald's submission. What he has shown is that the sentencing court's own jurisdiction to increase sentence is rarely if ever exercised, and, in any event in the Crown Court, lapses 28 days after the imposition of the sentence. Nevertheless the sentencing process does not preclude such increases. Accordingly, I agree with Lord Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Lloyd that he has failed to establish that "non-aggravation" is contrary to sentencing principle.In the result however I doubt whether this argument is as fundamental as Mr. Fitzgerald contended. The question is whether in the exercise of the powers entrusted to him by Parliament, the Home Secretary is entitled to adopt a policy which permits an effective increase in sentence. In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318 suggests that such a policy would not be unlawful. Even if the development of the relevant principles in the House of Lords in subsequent cases may have constrained the very wide powers of the Home Secretary endorsed in In re Findlay, they do not lead to the conclusion that the existence of a power effectively to increase sentence, to be exercised "exceptionally," and justified by reasons, would be unlawful.The difficulties of treating the ordinary sentencing process in court and the determination of the penal tariff as if they were identical were illustrated by the final strand of Mr. Fitzgerald's argument, arising from his client's 1987 "confession." He complained that the Home Secretary should have accepted its contents and acted accordingly, and that as he had not expressly given an indication to the contrary, he should be deemed to have done so. Judges are familiar with the process of assessing relative culpability of co-defendants. They explain their conclusions, and reasons,in open court, and their conclusions are reflected in the sentences. They can be considered in the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division). Like the sentencing judge, who must act fairly to all the co-defendants in any given case, the Home Secretary has responsibilities to Brady, identical to those he owes to Hindley. If he were to accept the allegations made by Hindley over 20 years after the relevant events, he would be making findings adverse and damaging to Brady in his absence, on the basis of untested allegations by an accomplice, and without giving Brady any opportunity to answer them. That, too, would contradict the principles of fairness, without any practical possibility of a "hearing" to establish the truth of the allegations.It is permissible for a sentencing judge considering allegations made by a co-accused to indicate that he will approach them favourably to that defendant's case on the basis that they may be true, while making it clear to the co-defendant that in deciding sentence in his case, he would disregard them. In other words the fact that they may be true for the purpose of considering one defendant's case does not mean that they have been positively established against the other defendant. The process is public, and usually all the co-defendants are present. However carefully expressed, with all the safeguards of public hearings and fully recorded proceedings, such conclusions reached in the absence of one or other of the co-defendants provide a persistent source of appeals, usually on the ground of disparity, sometimes unfairness. Given the private nature of the present procedure, and its possible impact on Brady, it was not unreasonable for the Home Secretary to be cautious in his approach to the allegations made by the applicant.Mr. Fitzgerald's reliance on the 1987 "confession" as material relevant to the date of his client's release, highlights another distinction between the sentence imposed by a trial judge and the evaluation of the penal tariff. The lapse of time means that this material cannot be reconsidered by the sentencing judge, or the Lord Chief Justice, or the Home Secretary in office when the mandatory sentence was imposed, who would, if the tariff system had then been in operation, and subject to the emergence of exceptional circumstances, have decided the matter. The trial judge cannot be asked to re-evaluate his assessment of the relative culpability of the applicant. With the possible exception of consultation with the present Lord Chief Justice, no further judicial input is available. As part of the continuing process in these cases, a prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence must be permitted to put fresh material before the Home Secretary for consideration, even many years after the fixing of the penal tariff. It is unnecessary to decide whether he should consider material relating to the tariff from sources other than the prisoner herself, and if so, subject to what procedural precautions. If admissible information throws light on the offences for which the prisoner was sentenced, or her involvement or culpability, then I can see no justification for the conclusion that it can only be taken into account to the extent that it may be favourable. In my judgment it may serve either to mitigate or to aggravate her culpability. If so the Home Secretary may take it into account and conclude, "exceptionally," that the tariff period should be "revised." Thisprocess may result in the adjustment of the tariff period, upwards or downwards.Mr. Fitzgerald supported his argument by pointing out that sentencing courts normally give credit to any defendant for admissions, frankness with investigating police officers, and ultimately pleas of guilty. Indeed the principle that a plea of guilty should be taken into account is now enshrined in statute (section 48 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994). Nevertheless when a defendant pleads guilty to murder the plea cannot be taken into account in the sentence, which remains life imprisonment. It is a factor to which the Home Secretary's attention would no doubt be drawn by the judge in his report on the case, and would normally be regarded as providing some mitigation. Mr. Fitzgerald's greater difficulty is that if a confession reveals greater criminality than the prosecution would have been able to prove without it (as it frequently does) the court determining sentence does not ignore damaging admissions and confine its attention exclusively to matters of mitigation. Similarly, when taking into consideration offences admitted by the defendant, the sentencing court does not ignore them: they are indeed taken into consideration, and the result sometimes is that a much longer sentence is imposed than would otherwise have been appropriate by reference only to the specific offences charged in the indictment. The applicant's convictions did not reveal the full extent of her criminal activity with Brady. Between February and August 1987 she admitted to the Greater Manchester police, first, what she had previously denied, that she had in fact been guilty of the murders of Edward Evans, Lesley Ann Downey and John Kilbride, and that she was party to the murders of two other children, Pauline Reade (murdered in July 1963) and Keith Bennett (murdered in June 1964). As she had been acquitted of the murder of John Kilbride she could not have been prosecuted for that crime, and she has not in fact been prosecuted for the murders of Pauline Reade and Keith Bennett.When this information eventually emerged over 20 years after the applicant's conviction it required the most careful attention. In the Divisional Court Lord Bingham C.J. [1998] Q.B. 751, 763-764, summarised her detailed account of:"the manner in which she had been dominated, intimidated, and suborned by her co-defendant Brady, with whom she had at the time been deeply in love. She described how she had been drugged and assaulted by Brady; how she had told a girlfriend of her fear of him; how he had made threats against her and her family; how she had applied for a job in Germany in order to get away from him. This account was accepted by the police as in all essentials correct."Notwithstanding Mr. Fitzgerald's measured deployment of the contents of the narrative statement by way of mitigation, the stark reality was that the murders of Edward Evans and Lesley Ann Downey could now be seen as the culmination of a series of killings in which the applicant was involved with Brady. This murderous relationship had persisted for over two years. With full knowledge of and having been involved with him in dreadful earlier events, she actively participated and assisted him to torture and kill Edward Evans and Lesley Ann Downey. Assuming in her favour,without deciding, that everything she said about Brady's power over and violence towards her was true, the "confession" underlined the accuracy of the trial judge's comments that she was "as deeply corrupted" as Brady, and had indeed been so corrupted when she took part in the murders of which she was convicted in May 1966.It was not unreasonable for the Home Secretary to conclude from this confession that a "much greater level of involvement" with Brady than the applicant had previously admitted was now revealed, and that whatever the position may have been at any earlier assessment of her penal tariff, "given the appalling circumstances of these offences and her role in them" a whole life tariff was now justified. In my judgment this conclusion, albeit based on information coming from the applicant herself, cannot be stigmatised as unreasonable, or falling outside the proper application of the Home Secretary's present policy. No grounds for interference by this court have been shown.This appeal should be dismissed.DISPOSITION:Appeal dismissed.Leave to appeal.SOLICITORS:Solicitors: Taylor Nichol; Treasury Solicitor.NEW_ARTICLEHindley v Higgins and AnotherCourt of Appeal (Civil Division)(CA Unbound Transcript 1011HEARING-DATES: 24 August 198324 August 1983COUNSEL:LH Hoffmann QC and J Hackson for the Appellants; EP Skone-James for the Respondent.PANEL: Griffiths and Kerr LJJJUDGMENTBY-1: GRIFFITHS LJJUDGMENT-1:GRIFFITHS LJ: This is an appeal by Mr Stuart Higgins, who is a journalist employed by News Group Newspapers Limited, and that company, the publishers of The Sun newspaper, from the refusal of Mr Justice Mervyn Davies to lift an interlocutory injunction obtained by Miss Myra Hindley preventing the further publication of a series of articles which The Sun newspaper proposed to publish during the course of this week. Although the form of the injunction obtained by Miss Myra Hindley was an injunction until Friday only of this week, it has been agreed between the parties that this hearing should be treated as determining whether or not those injunctions should run until trial of the action.The matter arises against the following background of fact. Miss Myra Hindley, as is common knowledge, was in 1966 convicted with a man named Brady of the murder of children, commonly known as the Moors murders. In August 1978 she wrote a very lengthy submission in support of her application to be considered for parole. The statement is headed as follows: "Statement, for Mr P J Donnelly, Solicitor, for eventual perusal by the Home Secretary and members of the Parole Board, including the Chairman. Dated 31.8.78." The statement was written wholly in the handwriting of Miss Hindley herself. She is prepared to depose upon affidavit (but because of her present confinement in prison it has not yet been possible to swear the affidavit) that she intended a very limited number of persons to see that document. They were limited to those members of the parole board before whom her application might come; to Lord Longford, who was interested in supporting her plea for parole; and to one other lady, a psychiatrist. In some manner which is not explained to the court but referred to in an affidavit of the first defendant, Mr Stuart Higgins, a copy of that application came into his hands. He has sworn an affidavit which reads as follows: "I... have been for four and a half years a journalist with The Sun, which is published by the Second Defendants. On Monday of this week the Sun began publishing a series of articles relating to the Plaintiff which is intended to run over a number of days. 2. I was responsible for researching and writing this series. I am unable to reveal from whom I obtained a copy of the letter... It was made available to me by a source whom I believe to be reputable and whom I believe was legitimately in possession of it." He then exhibits to his affidavit certain newspaper articles to which I shall have to refer hereafter.It is to be observed that in that affidavit Mr Higgins does not assert that whoever gave him the parole submission of Miss Myra Hindley had her permission to give it to him or that Miss Hindley at any stage gave permission to anybody to part with that statement to anyone other than the parole board and the two or three other people she intended to have it to support her application for parole.The copyright in that long statement is clearly in Miss Hindley. The Sun newspaper, after an advertising campaign both in the newspapers and on the television, then proceeded to publish a series of articles beginning this week about Miss Myra Hindley and her hopes of obtaining parole. The first article in the series merited a very large headline on the front page of The Sun on Monday 22nd August. It is headed: "MYRA - How Moors killer fights for freedom", and there is a large picture of Miss Hindley on the front page with the comment: "Myra Hindley... this is how the Moors killer's looks have changed". On the second page, which is a continuation of the text of the article that begins on the first page there appears under "EMOTIONS" the following passage: "The Sun's file on the nation's most-hated woman is a compelling story that will arouse strong emotions in everyone - ranging from outrage and hatred to sheer surprise. In her own words and neat handwriting, Hindley pleads her case for release on parole. The Sun's amazing series will reveral for the first time the full inside story of what life is really like for Hindley in prison at Cookham Wood, Kent."Then on the Tuesday, again on the front page, there is this heading: "World Exclusive" - "WHY I SHOULD BE FREE By Moors murderess MYRA HINDLEY - Centre Pages". When one turns to the Centre pages there is a very large headline: "WHY I SHOULD BE SET FREE - BY MYRA" - "'I was a victim of Brady's evil influence'". The introductory text reads as follows: "EVIL child-killer Myra Hindley wants to be set free because she feels that after 18 years in jail she has paid her debt to society. She has poured her heart out in a remarkable 22,000-word statement to the Parole Board which she hopes will help secure her release and explode the 'myth' of Myra The Monster. Her case for freedom will arouse emotions all over Britain, ranging from anger and horror to amazement and surprise. In her passionate plea for parole, Hindley, 41, portrays herself as the helpless - almost innocent - victim of the evil influence of her lover, Ian Brady."Thereafter, the remainder of this two-page spread is devoted almost entirely to long excerpts in inverted commas from the text of her submission written to the parole board in 1978. There is very little comment on the text itself, but in an editorial appearing in the same copy at page 6 under the heading "THE SUN SAYS" there is a sub-heading "For life!": "Myra Hindley has a different hairstyle. She has had her nose fixed. She says she is a changed person and a suitable candidate for probation. But we - and, we imagine, decent, caring people everywhere - cannot erase the ghastly memory of the helpless little children she and her vile partner, Ian Brady, tortured and killed for pleasure. At present, the country is outraged over a sexual assault on a boy of just six years old." Then, in black type, underlined: "Rather than face the remotest risk of another child suffering, we would wish Myra Hindley to be kept in prison for the rest of her days."It was following that publication of The Sun and with the intimation through the advertisement that this series of articles was to be continued throughout this week, with, as the plaintiff believed, the likelihood of further very substantial quotations from her parole submissions, that she applied to the High Court for an injunction to restrain further publication, both on the ground of breach of confidence, in that her submission to the parole board was a confidential publication and it was a breach of The Sun newspaper to publish it, and also on the ground that it was a breach of copyright.The learned judge granted the injunction limited to Friday. The Sun newspaper immediately appealed because this series of articles is planned, as I understand it, to run through this week, terminating on Saturday, and we have had the advantage of seeing the copy that it was intended to publish today, but for the injunction, which contains further substantial quotation from her submission. As they were not able to publish it, they published on the front page, in even larger headlines than appeared on Tuesday, the following heading: "EVIL MYRA GAGS THE SUN" - "Judge halts parole story", and there then follows a factual account of the proceedings before Mr Justice Mervyn Davies resulting in the temporary injunction.That is the background upon which this matter comes before the court. On the face of it, the copyright being in Miss Hindley in respect of her parole submissions, there is in this case a clear breach of copyright which the plaintiff would be entitled to ask should be restrained by an injunction unless the defendants can bring themselves within the special defences provided by section 6 of the Copyright Act of 1956. They rely upon the exceptions contained in section 6 subsection (2) and subsection (3). Subsection (2) reads as follows: "No fair dealing with a literary, dramatic or musical work shall constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work if it is for purposes of criticism or review, whether of that work or of another work, and is accompanied by a sufficient acknowledgment." Subsection (3) provides: "No fair dealing with a literary, dramatic or musical work shall constitute an infringement of the copyright in the work if it is for the purpose of reporting current events - (a) in a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical, or (b) by means of broadcasting, or in a cinematograph film, and, in a case falling within paragraph (a) of this subsection, is accompanied by a sufficient acknowledgment."What the defendants say is that the publication of the articles which they wish to continue throughout this week will constitute a criticism of the parole submission submitted by Miss Hindley in 1978. They rely upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in Hubbard v. Vosper, [1972] 2 QB 84, [1972] 1 All ER 1023, as showing that criticism in subsection (2) is not restricted to criticism of the literary merit or style of the work, but includes criticism of the ideas expressed in the work and of the philosophy that underlies it. They say that the burden of their articles is to criticise the reasons put forward by Myra Hindley in her submissions, showing that, whatever the contents of that submission and however she may have changed, nevertheless it would be unsafe, so far as the public is concerned, to release her because of the risk to other children in the future.For myself, having read the articles, I have very considerable doubt whether The Sun's articles are a criticism of her parole submissions within the meaning of section 6(2). It seems to me that they are no more than setting out for the readership of The Sun extensive passages that she wrote on her own behalf to the parole board. I see little, if any, detailed criticism of any of the reasons that she puts forward or any of her thinking in those submissions, but what is said is that, by including an editorial in which The Sun expressed their view that, whatever was in the submissions, the risk of releasing her should not be taken, that amounts to a criticism of the material that she placed before the parole board. I very much doubt if anybody, applying the ordinary meaning of the word "criticism", would regard that as a criticism of her submissions. However, I can see that the matter is at least arguable and, this being an interlocutory stage, it is not for this to finally make up its mind on issues but to examine whether or not they are arguable.The next question that arises is whether in all the circumstances it is a fair dealing for a public newspaper, who has obtained by unknown means, so far as this court is concerned, a parole submission by a prisoner, to publish and criticise that parole submission without either the knowledge and certainly without the consent of the prisoner and against the prisoner's wishes. I can think of nothing more damaging to the parole system and more inimical to the public interest than that prisoners should fear that what they might write to the parole board in confidence in support of their applications for parole may be leaked to the press and become published in national newspapers and publicly attacked. I do not think that any prisoner, if he felt that there was a real risk of that happening, would write with the freedom that is desirable when the parole board are considering this submission. The parole board want, so far as they can, to understand from the prisoner himself the reasons why he wishes to have parole and why he thinks he deserves parole. They raise many highly confidential matters and it would be corrosive and destructive of any confidence between board and prisoner if it was felt that such documents were to be leaked and receive general publication.In fairness to The Sun newspaper, Mr Hoffmann on their behalf has freely acknowledged that if The Sun had come into possession of this document without the consent of Miss Hindley it would, as a general rule, be unfair dealing for them to publish it, particularly when, as they say, they are publishing it for the purpose of criticising it, that is, undermining the reasons given by the prisoner in support of his application for parole.But, as I understand the argument, it is submitted that because of previous publications in the press there are in this case special circumstances that make The Sun's publication against Miss Hindley's wishes fair dealing. That brings me back to Mr Higgins' affidavit and the article to which he refers in that affidavit.In 1979, in January of that year, there were published in The Daily Mail, in The Evening News and in The Daily Express a number of short articles about Myra Hindley and her appeal for parole. In those short articles there is a reference to the parole submission that she had made to the Home Secretary and there are two or three very short extracts from that submission. I am looking first at The Express. It turn now to The Evening News. That undoubtedly contains considerably longer extracts from the submission, and furthermore in The Mail there are again some very short extracts. The principal one is undoubtedly The Evening News in which there is a full-page article with very considerable quotation. It is quite apparent that somebody on the staff of The Evening News had had access to that parole statement.Miss Hindley is prepared to swear an affidavit to the effect that she had never given permission for that statement to be reveraled to any of those newspapers. She also deposes to the fact that it came to her knowledge that The Evening Standard were proposing to publish a series in early 1979 and that her solicitors threatened injunction proceedings and that no further extracts were published. So the answer by Miss Hindley is that she never gave permission for the 1979 publications and when she thought there was a threat of further publication she took action which was effective to prevent it. The principal further publication upon which The Sun newspaper relies is in a publication under the same ownership as The Sun newspaper, namely, The Sunday Times. That took place in two articles published in successive issues of The Sunday Times in April of last year, 1982. they purport to report an interview in prison between one of the authors of the articles and Myra Hindley and it contains the following passage (I am quoting from the second of the articles of 25th April): "In 1978, however, after renewed pleas from her solicitor, Hindley prepared a 20,000-word statement.It took her eight months and entailed, she said, the 'difficult and painful' process of 'reopening wounds some of which are still not completely healed.' But she hoped it would 'explode the myth' of her case and show it 'in the cold hard light of reason.' Recently she provided a further 6,000 words to amplify points posed by The Sunday Times. The statements contain familiar Hindley themes". It then goes on to give a summary of some of the philosophy underlying the submissions and to contain a limited number of direct quotes, but it is not clear to me on the evidence whether the quotes are from the original parole statement or from what is said to be the further 6,000-word submission. What is said, as I understand it, is that this court should draw the inference from the form in which The Sunday Times published the two articles in April 1982 that Myra Hindley had taken a conscious decision to take The Sunday Times into her confidence, to enlist them on her side in a struggle to obtain her release on parole, and for this purpose she had disclosed to them a copy of the parole submission that she wrote in 1978 and had further amplified it by another 6,000-word written explanation, and had sanctioned The Sunday Times to publish as much as they wanted of both those statements in the hope of exciting public sympathy on her behalf. If that was her intention and belief, she was sadly mistaken. I do not propose to read large parts of it, but it is quite clear that the writer of the article was strongly critical of the written submissions and thought that Miss Hindley had, to a large extent, deluded herself.It is said that we should draw the inference from those articles that Myra Hindley had entered the public domain with her parole submission, enlisted the report of a national newspaper, consented to its publication and, that being so, in all the circumstances of the case, it was fair dealing without her permission to publish as much of the article as The Sun wanted and to express their strong criticism of her plea for parole. But, on the other hand, Miss Hindley is prepared to depose that she had never given permission to The Sunday Times to publish from her parole submissions, and that is clearly a conflict which we cannot possibly determine at this hearing. I certainly would not be prepared to say that, from the form of The Sunday Times article, it was an inevitable conclusion that Miss Hindley had freely consented to The Sunday Times using whatever they wanted of her parole submission or of any additional statement. It that really is the basis upon which it was intended to say that this is fair dealing, one would have thought that, where publications are in the same ownership, there should not have been the least difficulty in presenting evidence to this court to show the full circumstances in which The Sunday Times came into possession of this parole submission and of the circumstances in which they published it.I arrive at this decision: I cannot say for myself that there is no arguable case that it might be fair dealing to criticise this parole submission, because, if Miss Hindley had chosen to make it public through one national newspaper in the hope of enlisting support, I am very doubtful if it could be said that it was not fair dealing for another newspaper to answer on the same material stating their view of the matter. But, as I say, as the matter rests at the moment, all one can say is that there may be the beginnings of an arguable case.Even if there is an arguable case, how does the matter lie upon a balance of convenience? So far as The Sun newspaper is concerned, this is not a matter of instant news: this is an ongoing situation. It is public knowledge that Miss Hindley's further application for parole is not to be considered until the year 1985. If The Sun newspaper wishes to interest their readers in the contents of her parole statement and to criticise it, there are still years ahead in which the matter may be of lively interest to their readers. It is not suggested that they are going to suffer any financial loss if they cannot in their next two issues print extracts from the submissions. It is quite apparent that these proceedings are providing exceedingly newsworthy material, meriting, as I have already observed, one of the largest headlines I have ever seen, and I look forward with interest to tomorrow. It therefore appears to me that The Sun newspaper is neither going to be damaged in its pocket, nor in its circulation, and nor will their readers be deprived of any matter of really compelling interest if this case goes for the moment against them. If they fight the action out and it is held that they make good their defence under section 6 subsection (2), then they will be free to run this series of articles if they wish.So far as the plaintiff, Miss Hindley, is concerned, if an injunction is not granted, then the damage is done. "But", say The Sun, "what damage? She does not suffer any damage." I cannot agree. I think that a prisoner who finds his or her confidential outpourings to the parole board published in great detail in a national newspaper with, I believe, the largest circulation in the country and criticised and undermined will naturally suffer great anguish of mind during the course of her imprisonment pending the next parole review. Of course one would not in fact expect the members of the parole board to be affected by such a series of articles when they came to consider her case, but those in prison, awaiting with mounting anxiety the result of their parole application, cannot be expected to consider these matters with rational detachment; they are deeply emotionally involved in their applications, and I think it very understandable that, if they see their applications being torn apart and rejected by a great newspaper, they will consider that it does great damage to their parole prospects and the anguish of mind will be great. "That can all be compensated for in damages", say The Sun: "She can have damages for it." I do not think any money, in the situation in which this woman finds herself, would be an adequate compensation for that sort of tribullation. Accordingly, I have no doubt in my mind that in this case, even if there is just an arguable case, the balance of convenience comes down heavily in favour of the judge's decision to grant an injunction.I have not dealt separately with the application under subsection (3) because that is also dependent upon whether this is fair dealing, and what I have said about fair dealing in relation to subsection (2) applies to subsection (3). I should however say that I am very doubtful if this situation is a "current event" within the meaning of subsection (3), but I express that only as a provisional view. Furthermore, as I think that this injunction should be continued on the grounds of breach of copyright, I do not feel it necessary myself to express any view on the question of a breach of confidence. For the reasons I have given, I see no reason for supposing that the learned judge exercised his discretion improperly and accordingly I would dismiss this appeal.JUDGMENTBY-2: KERR LJJUDGMENT-2:KERR LJ: In this case there is no doubt that the copyright in the plaintiff's lengthy submission to the secretary of the parole board is in her. It is also not suggested that this publication by The Sun is made with any authority from her, direct or indirect; indeed there is a significant silence on that aspect in the affidavit to which Lord Justice Griffiths has already referred. Accordingly, this is a plain case of a flagrant infringement of copyright unless the defendants can bring themselves within what I can summarily refer to as the fair dealing defences in section 6 subsections (2) and (3) of the Copyright Act 1956. As it seems to me, these are maters in relation to which the onus rests on the defendants. As Lord Justice Griffiths has said, they may just have shown a shadowy, barely arguable triable issue on those two subsections. I say no more about that because if the matter is pursued to trial it will have to be fully investigated and decided then. What is quite clear, however, is that, but for any previous publications of extracts from the submissions to the parole board with Miss Myra Hindley's consent, so as to place the contents of that long submission into the public domain, any defence of fair dealing must be out of the question. It cannot be fair to publish confidential submissions from a prisoner to the parole board and then to express the view that they are without substance and that parole ought not to be granted. Mr Hoffman fairly conceded that if it were not for the previous publications, he could not begin to say that there is any arguable case of fair dealing within section 6.As regards the earlier publications, the only one of these in relation to which it is suggested, though not on affidavit, that the plaintiff co-operated in any way is the one which appeared in The Sunday Times. I am prepared to infer from the material before the court, from the article in The Sunday Times, and from what Mr Hoffmann said on behalf of The Sun, that there may well have been a disclosure by Miss Hindley of that docusment to The Sunday Times. But what she swears, which is at present uncontradicted on behalf of the defendants, is that "the document has never been published with my consent or acquiescence. Nor have I ever licensed the publication of parts." That is quoted from her second affidavit. In her first affidavit she said: "As appears from its title", (this document) "was of a confidential nature and it has never been published with my consent or acquiescence."The fact that she may have disclosed it to a reporter of The Sunday Times is in no way inconsistent, as I see it, with her statement that she never agreed to the publication of any parts of the statement, let alone to what we have in the present case, which is the reproduction of long extracts with some linking passages. These were published yesterday, and other extracts would have appeared today but for the injunction.On the state of the evidence before the court at present, even allowing for the inferencees to be drawn from The Sunday Times article and from what Mr Hoffmann has said, there is no reason to infer that Myra Hindley is inaccurate when she says that she never authorised the publication of this statement or of extracts from it. However, there is a triable issue on that point, and therefore I say no more about it.When one then comes to consider the relative damage that would be done to the two parties to this litigation if the injunction is maintained or lifted, there can, as I see it, only be one answer. She, the prisoner, is bound to see this campaign of a week, in which her submission to the parole board is in effect being torn to shreds, as extremely damaging and as prejudicing her chances of obtaining parole in 1985; and indeed that is what she says in her affidavit. On the other hand, so far as The Sun is concerned, no financial damage is suggested, and the series can clearly go on, and no doubt will go on, but without - if the injunction stays - infringing her copyright any further. In this connection it is very important to bear in mind that there is no defense of public interest raised on behalf of The Sun in this case; no doubt for good reason.So it seems to me that the balance of convenience is all one way. Let there be a trial if the defendants wish it, and then, if they succeed, despite all the difficulties, in showing that this is a case of fair dealing and that the infringement of the prisoner's copyright is permitted by law, then let them publish the statement thereafter to any extent that they may wish.I agree that this appeal should be dismissed.DISPOSITION:Appeal dismissed; injunctions until trial of the action or further order in the terms of paragraph 1 of the statement of claim and of paragraph 5 amended to refer to "information contained in the said work and not derived from any other source without the licence of the plaintiff"; costs in cause; respondent's legal aid taxation.SOLICITORS:Allen & Overy; the Treasury Solicitor. NEW_ARTICLEREGINA v SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOMEDEPARTMENT, Ex parte HINDLEY[DIVISIONAL COURT][1998] QB 751HEARING-DATES: 8, 9, 10, 18 December 199718 December 1997CATCHWORDS:Prisons - Prisoners' rights - Release on licence - Mandatory life sentence prisoner - Tariff element of determinate length provisionally fixed but not communicated to prisoner - Whole life tariff subsequently fixed and communicated - Policy of review of whole life tariff limited to considerations of retribution and deterrence but later amended to take account of exceptional circumstances - Whether whole life tariff lawful - Whether increase from determinate tariff lawful - Whether review policy lawful - Criminal Justice Act 1991 (c. 53), s. 35 - Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 (c. 43), s. 29HEADNOTE:In 1966 the applicant and a co-defendant were convicted of the murder of two children and received mandatory life sentences. The applicant was also convicted of being an accessory after the fact to the murder of a third child, of which the co-defendant was convicted, and was sentenced to a determinate custodial term. Immediately following the trial the judge expressed the expectation to the Home Office that the applicant would be kept in prison for "a very long time" and that her co-defendant would not be released in any foreseeable future. Review of any question of release was deferred until 1982 when, in response to the Secretary of State's request, the Lord Chief Justice recommended that, while he would never release her co-defendant, no term less that 25 years would be appropriate for the applicant. In November 1983 the Secretary of State, in a statement to Parliament, announced his policy for the release of mandatory life sentence prisoners, in the exercise of his discretion under the Criminal Justice Act 1967, in particular, that sexual or sadistic child murderers could normally expect to serve a tariff period of at least 20 years to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence, although a longer period might be necessary in certain cases, and that the first review would take place three years before the expiry of the tariff term. In January 1985, on further consultation, the Lord Chief Justice confirmed his recommendation, but the Secretary of State reached the provisional conclusion that 30 years would be the appropriate period for the applicant and 40 years for her co-defendant. In March 1985 the Secretary of State announced to Parliament that in the case of prisoners whose tariff was longer than 20 years the first formal review by the Parole Board would take place after 17 years in custody. He referred the cases of the applicant and her co-defendant to the board, which declined to recommend their release and decided to review the case of the applicant in five years and that of her co-defendant in ten years. At that time the applicant was not told of, nor could she have calculated, the provisional 30-year period. In 1987 the applicant confessed to the police her complicity in the murder of the third child, of which her co-defendant had been convicted in 1966, and of two other children. In 1990 the Secretary of State concluded that only a whole life tariff was appropriate in the applicant's case. By his policy announced to Parliament in July 1993 the Secretary of State stated that, in the exercise of his release discretion, confirmed by section 35 of the Criminal JusticeAct 1991, n1 a prisoner would be informed of his tariff, the judicial recommendations and any reasons for departing from them, and that exceptionally a tariff might be increased or reduced but that a prisoner might make representations against any such proposed increase. In December 1994 the Secretary of State announced his policy in respect of those serving a whole life tariff, that there would be periodic ministerial review after such a prisoner had served 25 years in custody to consider whether the tariff should be converted to one of determinate length, but that such review would be confined solely to considerations of retribution and deterrence. At that time the applicant was informed of the judicial recommendations, the provisional 30-year period set in 1985 and of the decision to impose a whole life tariff in 1990. On 3 February 1997, following the receipt of representations by the applicant, the Secretary of State fixed her tariff afresh at whole life. In November 1997 the Secretary of State revised the policy of December 1994, in the exercise of his release discretion under section 29 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, n2 and stated that on review after the 25-year period account would be taken of exceptional circumstances, including exceptional progress in prison. On 19 November 1997 he informed the applicant that while he would consider her representations on its reduction he saw no reason to depart from the whole life tariff imposed on her. In proceedings for judicial review the applicant sought orders quashing the decisions to impose and to maintain a whole life tariff and declarations that the policy for review was unlawful.On the application for judicial review: -Held, dismissing the application, (1) that, since there was no reason in principle why a crime of sufficient heinousness should not attract lifelong imprisonment for the purpose of punishment, since in abolishing the death penalty Parliament had not indicated that it never intended a life sentence to bear that connotation and since it had confirmed, by section 29 of the Act of 1997, the Secretary of State's wide discretion to release mandatory life prisoners in the knowledge that some such prisoners were subject to a whole life tariff, such a tariff was not unlawful (post, pp. 769A-C,779B(2) That although the Secretary of State enjoyed a broad release discretion conferred by successive statutes and was free to formulate and apply policies for its exercise he could not fetter his discretion by adopting a policy which admitted of no exceptions; that, since the policy for periodic review announced in December 1994 had limited consideration solely to matters of retribution and deterrence, it had fettered the exercise of discretion and was unlawful; but that, since the revised policy of November 1997 provided for account to be taken of exceptional circumstances, the defect had been remedied and the policy currently applicable was not unlawful (post, pp. 769D-E, 770A-C, 779C-D(3) That the 30-year term considered appropriate in 1985 was, in the context of the regime then applicable, not fixed but provisional to enable the Secretary of State or his successor to make upward or downward revision; further, that the term had n1 Criminal Justice Act 1991, s. 35(2): "If recommended to do so by the board, the Secretary of State may, after consultation with the Lord Chief Justice together with the trial judge if available, release on licence a life prisoner who is not a discretionary life prisoner."n2 Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, s. 29(1), so far as material, is in identical terms to s. 35(2) of the Act of 1991. not been communicated to the applicant, nor could she have discovered it; and that, accordingly, the Secretary of State had been entitled to impose and to confirm the whole life tariff; and that, accordingly, the decisions of February and November 1997 were not unlawful (post, pp. 773D-F, 779BIn re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, H.L.(E.) and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, H.L.(E.) considered.INTRODUCTION:Application for judicial review.By notice of motion dated 25 November 1997 and amended with leave of the Divisional Court the applicant, Myra Hindley, sought judicial review by way of (a) orders of certiorari to quash (1) a decision of the Secretary of State for the Home Department communicated on 3 February 1997 that she would serve a whole life tariff to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence in respect of the two offences of murder of which she had been convicted; and (2) a decision of the Secretary of State for the Home Department communicated on 19 November 1997 to maintain that tariff; and (b) declarations that (1) the policy of the Secretary of State, announced on 7 December 1994 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), cols. 234-235: written answer), and maintained thereafter that those on whom whole life tariffs were imposed would not thereafter be able to gain release by virtue of their progress in prison and lack of dangerousness to society, and (2) the policy of the Secretary of State, announced on 10 November 1997 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), cols. 419-420: written answer), maintaining a category of "whole life" life sentence prisoners in respect of whom their length of time in custody, however long, their progress in prison, however great, and their lack of dangerousness to society, however clear, would never qualify them for more than the possibility of release before death as an exception to a predetermined general rule of lifelong incarceration were unlawful.The grounds, inter alia, on which relief was sought were that (1) the imposition of a whole life tariff was unlawful if and in so far as it purported to rule out all prospect of release under section 35(2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 on grounds of the prisoner's subsequent progress in prison and lack of dangerousness to society; (2) such a tariff constituted an impermissible fetter on the Secretary of State's discretion under the Act of 1991; (3) it was unlawful for the Secretary of State to increase the determinate tariff of 30 years to a whole life tariff; alternatively even if in exceptional circumstances such an increase was lawful, it could only be so where special factors, absent here, existed; (4) it was irrational for the Secretary of State to impose a tariff on the applicant which was identical to that imposed on her co-defendant, whose culpability was acknowledgedto have been the greater; (5) the imposition of the whole life tariff was so massive and disproportionate an increase in the judicial tariff as to be irrational; (6) that the Secretary of State failed to give adequate reasons for the decision of 3 February 1997 and subsequently for that of 19 November 1997; (7) the Secretary of State acted unfairly by failing (i) to disclose to the applicant the fact that a positive recommendation had been made by the Parole Board, and (ii) to invite representations in the light of that recommendation before he reached his decision in February 1997; (7) the Secretary of State's decision of 19 November 1997 was unlawful since he identified no new reasons for maintaining the tariff fixed by his predecessor and merely reaffirmed that earlier decision in the light of his new policy; (9) the Secretary of State's amended policy of 10 November 1997, while apparently correcting the errors of the former policy in fact remained unlawful since (i) in announcing the whole life tariff to the press and the media in an unqualified way it appeared that he had conclusively decided that the applicant would not be released whatever her progress, and that there was no serious intention to consider reducing her tariff, and (ii) the notion of a predetermined whole life tariff, which was only mitigated by the purported allowance for a possible reduction in the light of exceptional circumstances, still amounted to an unlawful fetter on the exercise of the Secretary of State's discretion since Parliament neither intended nor authorised the exercise of the continuing discretion to release at any time to be predetermined by the creation of a category of whole life tariff prisoners.The facts are stated in the judgment of Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J.COUNSEL:Edward Fitzgerald Q.C. and Tim Owen for the applicant. The policy of imposing a whole life tariff on a mandatory life sentence prisoner is unlawful since it contravenes the premise on which the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965 was enacted and is inconsistent with the practice adopted since 1967 and the statutory regime relating to parole. A prisoner serving a mandatory life sentence has been sentenced to life imprisonment with the possibility and expectation of his release after serving the punitive element set by the Secretary of State: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531. He has not been sentenced to lifelong incarceration from which the Secretary of State may release him as an act of mercy after the tariff period has expired. [Reference was made to In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318; Payne v. Lord Harris of Greenwich [1981] 1 W.L.R. 754; Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539 and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Venables [1998] A.C. 407.]The exercise of the Secretary of State's discretion must maintain a capacity for flexibility: see In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318 (C.A.). The 1993 policy in excluding any consideration of subsequent progress in prison improperly fetters the discretion of successive Secretaries of State and is unlawful. The amended policy of November 1997 is also unlawful in maintaining a category of whole life sentence prisoners whose length of time in custody, lack of dangerousness to society, and progress in prison will never qualify them for more than a possibility of discretionary releasefrom lifelong incarceration, and in respect of whom the Parole Board's statutory duty of consultation is deprived of meaning.Although the discretion conferred on the Secretary of State by section 35(2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 is wide, it must be exercised in conformity with general common law principles: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539. Fixing a tariff is so closely akin to sentencing as to attract the same fundamental principles and safeguards as govern the imposition of a sentence or penal term, whether judicial or quasi-judicial in character: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531; Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Venables [1998] A.C. 407 and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Handscomb (1987) 86 Cr.App.R. 59. To increase a tariff is to offend against the principle of non-aggravation of penalties, the common law rule of substantive fairness, that a penalty once fixed should not be increased: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte McCartney, The Times, 25 May 1994; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 667 of 1994. That principle finds expression in international law: see articles 10 and 11 of the European Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons; the Repatriation of Prisoners Act 1984; Reg. v. Menocal [1980] A.C. 598 and Reg. v. Nodjoumi (1985) 7 Cr.App.R.(S.) 183.Section 36 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 and section 47 of the Supreme Court Act 1981 do not undermine or negate the principle of non-aggravation. They merely provide limited exceptions to it. Nor is the principle defeated by authority. [Reference was made to Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539; Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Al-Mehdawi [1990] 1 A.C. 876 and Cross and Harris, Precedent in English Law, 4th ed. (1991), p. 157.The increase of the tariff also violates the applicant's legitimate expectation that her tariff was of finite length, provisionally 30 years, and that it would not be increased unless there was a special reason for regarding it as being inadequate: see de Smith, Woolf and Jowell, Judicial Review of Administrative Action, 5th ed. (1995), pp. 575-576, para. 13-035; Archbold, Criminal Pleading, Evidence & Practice, 1998 ed., pp. 461, 464-465, paras. 5.42, 5.51 and Reg. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, Ex parte M.F.K. Underwriting Agents Ltd. [1990] 1 W.L.R. 1545.The decision to increase the tariff, even if otherwise lawful, was irrational, for the Secretary of State failed to differentiate between the applicant's culpability and that of her co-defendant despite the clear distinction between them drawn by the prosecution, the police and the judiciary; or to take account of the relationship between the two defendants: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531.Since tariff-fixing is a quasi-judicial function the Secretary of State must give reasons for the factual basis of his decision: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531; In re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964] Q.B. 467; Reg. v. Parole Board, Ex parte Lodomez (1994) 26 B.M.L.R. 162 and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Walsh, The Times, 18 December 1991.No adequate reasons were given for the February 1997 decision and its adoption in November 1997. Evidence given on the application for judicial review cannot, by way of ex post facto rationalisation, supplement the reasons for the decision: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Lillicrop (unreported), 27 November 1996.David Pannick Q.C. and Mark Shaw for the Secretary of State. Parliament has deliberately conferred on the Secretary of State a broad discretion to decide the appropriate policies on release of mandatory life sentence prisoners, and in the application of those policies to individual cases: see section 61 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967; section 35(2) of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 and section 29 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997. That discretion contrasts with the regime governing discretionary life sentence prisoners, and involves no infringement of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms: see Wynne v. United Kingdom (1994) 19 E.H.R.R. 333. [Reference was also made to Practice Direction (Crime: Life Sentences) [1993] 1 W.L.R. 223.] The court recognises the width of the discretion and the Secretary of State's power to make and apply a tariff-setting policy, and to increase a tariff, in particular where a concluded view as to tariff had not been fixed or communicated to the prisoner or to depart from the judicial recommendations on tariff: see In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318; Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531 and Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539. Where exceptional features emerge after a tariff has been set the Secretary of State is entitled to revise the tariff upwards to reflect his more serious view of the situation. However, certain constraints on the exercise of the Secretary of State's power exist. Public clamour should not affect his decision (see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Venables [1998] A.C. 407) and he must act with procedural fairness (see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531).A whole life tariff is not immutable and may be revised downwards in response to fresh representations. The November 1997 policy did not fetter the discretion of the Secretary of State or his successors.Were the Secretary of State not entitled to adopt such a policy he would unlawfully impose a fetter on the exercise of his successors' discretion. The principle of non-aggravation of penalties, if it exists, is inapplicable here. Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte McCartney, The Times, 25 May 1994; Court of Appeal (Civil Division) Transcript No. 667 of 1994 is distinguishable on its facts, and concerned a discretionary life sentence.The applicant's tariff was not unlawfully increased. The provisional figure of 30 years set in 1985 was not fixed and was not communicated to her. There was therefore no increase when the whole life tariff was set in 1990 and communicated in 1994, and the position has remained unchanged. Even if a lower tariff had been fixed and communicated, the Secretary of State was entitled to increase it, in particular if he thought he had been misled, or in the exceptional circumstances disclosed by the applicant's 1987 confessions: see Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539.There has been no clear or unambiguous representation on which to ground any legitimate expectation: see Reg. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, Ex parte M.F.K. Underwriting Agents Ltd. [1990] 1 W.L.R. 1545. The only legitimate expectation on which the applicant may rely is that she will be treated fairly under the policy in place for the time being: see In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318.The Secretary of State is obliged to give reasons for his decision (see Ex parte Doody) and he can do so implicitly as well as explicitly. The evidence on the application for judicial review is consistent with his decision letter and does not constitute ex post facto rationalisation. [Reference was made to Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539.]His decision was not irrational. He can develop his own tariffs and may properly conclude that a whole life tariff is appropriate: see In re W. (An Infant) [1971] A.C. 682.Fitzgerald Q.C. in reply. The applicant's tariff could not unlawfully be increased from the period considered appropriate in 1985; the lawfulness of the increase does not depend on whether it was fixed or communicated to her: see Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539. In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318 is no longer relevant. [Reference was also made to Great Western Railway Co. v. Mostyn (Owners) [1928] A.C. 57.] A sentence or quasi-sentence cannot be increased except where the principle of non-aggravation is displaced by express enactment. The 1987 confessions cannot be prayed in aid to support any such increase. Since the reasons given to the applicant do not disclose why her tariff was increased and are therefore inadequate, the decision must be quashed: see Reg. v. City of London Corporation, Ex parte Matson (1995) 8 Admin.L.R. 49 and Reg. v. Higher Education Funding Council, Ex parte Institute of Dental Surgery [1994] 1 W.L.R. 242.Cur. adv. vult.18 December. The following judgments were handed down.PANEL: Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J., Hooper and Astill JJJUDGMENTBY-1: Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.JJUDGMENT-1:Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J: The applicant, Myra Hindley, is a mandatory life sentence prisoner now detained at Durham prison. She moves with leave to challenge two decisions and two policy statements. These are: (1) the decision of the then Home Secretary communicated on 3 February 1997 that the applicant should serve a "whole life" tariff to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence in respect of the two offences of murder of which she had been convicted; (2) the decision of the present Home Secretary communicated on 19 November 1997 to maintain the whole life tariff imposed on the applicant; (3) the policy of the then Home Secretary announced on 7 December 1994 and maintained thereafter that those upon whom whole life tariffs had been imposed would not thereafter be able to gain release by virtue of their progress in prison and lack of dangerousness to society; (4) the policy of the present Home Secretary "to maintain a category of 'whole life' life sentence prisoners in respect of whom their length of time in custody (however long), their progress in prison (however great), and their lack of dangerousness tosociety (however clear)" would never qualify them for more than the possibility of release before death as an exception to a predetermined general rule of lifelong incarceration.The applicant contends that these decisions and policy statements were unlawful.The crimesOn the evening of 6 October 1965 Edward Evans, aged 17, left his home to go to a football match. On the following day the applicant's brother-in-law telephoned the police to say that he had witnessed a murder in the house where Ian Brady and the applicant were living in Hattersley. The police visited and searched the house. They found the body of Edward Evans, trussed up in a polythene bag in a bedroom of the house. Lying near the body was another polythene bag containing a bloodstained axe. Post mortem examination showed a number of irregular head wounds and widespread bruising of the neck, shoulders, back, hands and arms. Most of the right side of the skull had been fractured. Death had been caused by cerebral contusion and haemorrhage, hastened by strangulation with a ligature.Both Brady and the applicant were arrested. On 15 October 1965 the police found two suitcases in the left luggage office at Manchester Central station. The suitcases contained pornographic books and books on torture, diaries belonging to Brady and the applicant, photographs and negatives and two recording tapes. The photographs included some of a young girl, naked except for shoes and socks, in obscene poses; there was a scarf tied round her mouth. One of the tapes was a recording of a young girl who was crying that she was being coerced to put something in her mouth and to take her hand away so that she could be photographed. She asked not to be undressed and pleaded to be allowed to go home to her mother. The voice of a woman was audible telling the victim to put something in her mouth.The child's voice on the tape was that of Lesley Ann Downey, aged 10, who had disappeared on 26 December 1964 after going to a fairground with a friend. On 16 October 1965 her naked body was found in a shallow peat grave on Saddleworth Moor. Her clothing, shoes and a string of beads were buried beside her. Part of the body had been eaten by animals, but sufficient remained to show that there was no gross injury or ligature to account for her death. Suffocation or smothering were thought to be possible causes of death. The woman's voice on the tape was the applicant's.On 21 October 1965 another body was found in a shallow grave on Saddleworth Moor. It was that of John Kilbride, who had disappeared on 23 November 1963 after leaving home at 1 p.m. to go to the cinema. He had been aged 12 at the time. His body, when discovered, was clothed, but the trousers and underpants were pulled down to mid-thigh and the underpants appeared to have been knotted at the back. There was no ligature on the neck or obvious sign of injury, and because of the degree of decomposition it was not possible to ascertain the cause of death.Brady and the applicant were charged with the murder of these three children. They pleaded not guilty. On 6 May 1966, at Chester Assizes,Brady then aged 27, was convicted of all three murders and sentenced to three terms of life imprisonment as required by law. He did not appeal. The applicant was convicted of murdering Edward Evans and Lesley Ann Downey, and was sentenced to two terms of life imprisonment. She was acquitted of murdering John Kilbride, but was found guilty of being an accessory after the fact to that murder and for that offence was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment. She was then aged 23. On the case presented by the Crown, Brady was the initiator of these crimes, and the actual killer; the applicant was cast as his willing accomplice, corrupted and dominated by him.These crimes, and the ensuing trial, received intense publicity, and aroused deep public enmity towards both Brady and the applicant.The issueThis court is now asked to rule on the lawfulness of decisions and policy statements made by successive Home Secretaries. That is its only task. It is no part of our function to decide whether the applicant should be released from prison, or whether she should remain in prison; or, if she is to remain in prison, to decide for how long she should remain. Our task, and our only task, is to review the lawfulness of what successive Home Secretaries have decided and announced as their policy.The historyWhen passing sentence on Brady and the applicant, the trial judge (Fenton Atkinson J.) made no recommendation under section 1(2) of the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965. But on 8 May 1966 he wrote to the then Home Secretary in these terms:"I did not make a recommendation in passing sentence because the only possible one would have been at that stage that neither of them should ever be set free again. Though I believe that Brady is wicked beyond belief without hope of redemption (short of a miracle), I cannot feel that the same is necessarily true of Hindley once she is removed from his influence. At present she is as deeply corrupted as Brady but it is not so long ago that she was taking instruction in the Roman Catholic Church and was a communicant and a normal sort of girl. One watched them day after day, looking for the smallest flicker of an expression indicating some shame or regret or realisation of the horror of what was being unfolded in the evidence, but it never came. There can be no doubt they tortured and later killed children because they enjoyed it and I am convinced that they regard those who are horrified by such conduct as 'morons' and beneath contempt. I hope Brady will not be released in any foreseeable future (assuming his fellow prisoners allow him to live) and that Hindley (apart from some dramatic conversion) will be kept in prison for a very long time. Indeed I would not expect to be available for consultation when any question of release comes up for consideration. But I do not claim sufficient prophetic insight to venture to suggest any term of years."In response to the Permanent Under-Secretary at the Home Office, Lord Widgery C.J. on 2 March 1978 wrote:"I think that we must face up to the question of whether 'life' should ever mean whole life. I think the public are given the impression that it does in really bad cases and I believe the pressure to restore capital punishment would increase sharply if this impression is dispelled. Further, I am occasionally put in difficulty by a judge who says, when passing sentence, that 'this is a case where life should mean life.' We must not say this sort of thing if it is not correct. I think that we should sincerely accept that a life sentence can extend to whole life, though this would obviously be restricted to the most extreme cases. If this is so, it would follow that no question of release for Brady or Hindley would arise in the foreseeable future, with much of their active lives before them, and (very important) the crime is still vivid in the public mind. I do not like the idea of putting the problem over for five years. I think this will encourage the view that something will be done after that time, whereas my view is that it is too early to contemplate release at all. As to any distinction between Brady and Hindley, I think that it will be widely expected that the woman will serve a shorter term. This may seem wholly illogical, but it does accord with sentencing tendencies when man and woman commit a joint offence. I have said enough to show that I do not think that we can usefully discuss what the ultimate term of imprisonment might be."On 24 January 1979, the then Home Secretary (Mr. Rees), asked to make a statement about the prospects of release from prison of Brady and the applicant, said that the joint committee of Home Office and Parole Board representatives had felt unable to recommend a date for the first formal review of these cases. He continued:"Final decisions on all matters relating to the release of life sentence prisoners rest with the Home Secretary of the day. He is not bound to accept a recommendation by the joint committee. Nor is he bound to accept a recommendation by the Parole Board that a prisoner should be released. I cannot bind my successors, but for my part I have reached no view about the time in the future when serious consideration might be given to the release of either prisoner. My present decision means that, unless there is some unforeseen development which would justify a different course, nothing will be done to initiate the formal review machinery for at least the next three years." (Hansard (H.C. Debates), col. 127: written answer.)It was nearly three years later, on 12 January 1982, when Lord Lane C.J. wrote to the Permanent Under-Secretary at the Home Office:"These cases raise the question of whether life imprisonment ever means what it says. If these two are to be released - or at any rate if Brady is to be released - then no one other than the homicidal maniac will ever suffer imprisonment or detention for the rest of their natural lives. You ask my views and so I will give them, though I doubt whether they are of as much value as your courteous terms imply. . . .I would never release Brady. From every point of view, the nature of the crime, the punishment required for it, the views of the public and so on, this is the case if ever there is to be one when a man should stay in prison till he dies. My initial views about Hindley were the same, but there are material differences between the two cases as Fenton Atkinson J. pointed out in his letter. I have modified my views to some extent, but I do not think that any term less than 25 years would be appropriate in the circumstances."In a written Parliamentary answer given on 29 January 1982 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), col. 454), the Home Secretary (Mr. Whitelaw) indicated that the cases of Brady and the applicant had recently been considered by the joint committee, which had decided to make no recommendation for consideration of the cases by a local review committee; this was the essential preliminary to a formal review by the Parole Board. Instead, the joint committee had recommended that it should itself look again at both cases in another three years. The Home Secretary stated that he had accepted the committee's advice, and that accordingly, barring unforeseen developments, nothing would be done to initiate a formal review of either case before further consideration by the joint committee in January 1985.In a written Parliamentary answer given on 30 November 1983 (Hansard (H.C. Debates), cols. 505-507) the Home Secretary (Mr. Brittan) outlined his policy on release of mandatory life sentence prisoners. He said that sexual or sadistic murderers of children could normally expect to serve at least 20 years, and that there would be cases where the gravity of the offence required a still longer period. He outlined new procedures to separate consideration of the requirements of retribution and deterrence from consideration of risk to the public. On the former question he would look to the judiciary for advice, and he would himself decide the date of the first reference of a case to a local review committee, following the initial consultation with the judiciary. This review would normally take place three years before expiry of the period necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence (often called the tariff or punitive term). On the latter question, he would look to the Parole Board for advice. But the discretion whether to release or not remained with him. He said that "except where a prisoner has committed an offence for which he has received a further custodial sentence, [a] first formal review date will not be put back."When, after the lapse of three years, the question of reviewing the sentences of Brady and the applicant again fell for consideration, Lord Lane C.J. was again consulted. In a letter of 10 January 1985, he informed the Home Office that his view remained the same. But he emphasised that the suggested period of 25 years' in the applicant's case was indeed a minimum.Having received this letter from Lord Lane C.J., the then Home Secretary (Mr. Brittan) considered the appropriate tariff term to be served by the applicant and reached the provisional conclusion that this should be 30 years. In the case of Brady, his provisional view was that the tariff term should be 40 years. The evidence is that it was very unusual for a tariff term to be described as provisional, and that this would only bedone in a most serious case. On 1 March 1985 the Home Secretary (Mr. Brittan) made a Parliamentary statement on his policy of referring to the Parole Board cases of life sentence prisoners who had already spent long periods in custody. In this statement he said:"The first stage in the formal review by the Parole Board machinery is the reference of the case to the local review committee at the prison at which the life sentence prisoner is held. The date of this first formal review is normally set for three years before the expiry of the period thought necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence which I decide after consultation with the judiciary. When this period is longer than 20 years, however, I have decided that the date of the first formal review should none the less still be set after 17 years in custody or at, or close to, the date when the case would again have been considered by the now disbanded joint parole board-Home Office committee. Both the prison staff and the prisoner are, however, informed that reviews set in these special circumstances do not in any way imply that 20 years has been set as the period necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence. In accordance with this policy, I am asking the [local review committees] at the prisons in which Ian Brady and Myra Hindley are detained to consider their cases as soon as possible and for the Parole Board subsequently to make its recommendations to me. The review of these cases does not mean either that the periods of detention necessary to meet the requirements of retribution and deterrence have been completed or are near completion; or that the Parole Board will recommend the release of either prisoner; or that I would necessarily accept such a recommendation if it were made." (Hansard (H.C. Debates), cols. 309-310: written answer.)The applicant cannot recall seeing the text of this statement.The applicant's case, and that of Brady, were duly considered by the Parole Board, which declined to recommend their release. At a meeting on 17 May 1985, the board decided not to review her case until a further five years had elapsed, and not to review Brady's case for a further 10 years. The applicant was not at this stage told that her tariff term had been provisionally fixed at 30 years, nor could she calculate this from the date of her first formal Parole Board review. This date only meant that her tariff was at least 20 years.In detailed confessions made by the applicant to the Greater Manchester police between February and August 1987 the applicant described her involvement in the two murders of which she had been convicted, making clear that she had been instrumental in luring both victims to their deaths. She also admitted complicity in the killing of three other children, John Kilbride, Keith Bennett (murdered in June 1964) and Pauline Reade (murdered in July 1963). She also gave a detailed account of the manner in which she had been dominated, intimidated, and suborned by her co-defendant Brady, with whom she had at the time been deeply in love. She described how she had been drugged and assaulted by Brady; how she had told a girlfriend of her fear of him; how he had made threats against her and her family; how she had applied for a job inGermany in order to get away from him. This account was accepted by the police as in all essentials correct.In July 1987 the Home Secretary (Mr. Hurd) announced revised procedures for reviewing the possible release dates of mandatory life sentence prisoners. The applicant's case was considered at a meeting in the Home Office on 26 July 1990. The Home Secretary (Mr. Waddington) then concluded that a careful study of her case and the view taken in other similar cases led inexorably to the conclusion that a whole life tariff was indicated for her. He indicated that this view should be formally put to the Parole Board as that taken by ministers.There the applicant's case rested until, on 27 July 1993, the Home Secretary (Mr. Howard) gave his Parliamentary response to the House of Lords' decision in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531: see Hansard (H.C. Debates), cols. 861-864: written answer. In the course of his answer he said:"At present, a prisoner is not told the contents of the judicial recommendation, nor the length of the period which the Secretary of State has determined to be the minimum necessary to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence. However, where the period so determined is less than 20 years, the prisoner can deduce its length by adding three years to the date which he is given for his first review; and where it is 20 years, he can deduce its length from the terms of the notice informing him that his first review will take place 17 years after sentence. But where the period is more than 20 years, the prisoner is not able to establish its total length."In accordance with the House of Lords' decision, the Home Secretary announced his intention in future to disclose to life sentence prisoners the Secretary of State's decision on tariff, with the recommendations made by the judges and, if the Secretary of State had departed from those recommendations, his reasons for doing so. He continued:"I take this opportunity to emphasise that the view which I or a minister acting under my authority takes, at the beginning of a mandatory life sentence, of the period necessary to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence is an initial view of the minimum period necessary to satisfy those requirements. It therefore remains possible for me, or a future Secretary of State, exceptionally to revise that view of the minimum period, either by reducing it, or by increasing it where I, or a successor in my office, concludes that, putting aside questions of risk, the minimum requirements of retribution and deterrence will not have been satisfied at the expiry of the period which had previously been determined. Before taking a decision to increase this minimum period, the Secretary of State would inform the prisoner that he was minded to take this action and afford him the opportunity to submit written representations as to why the period should not be increased. Any such representations would then be taken into account before any new decision was made. If it were decided to increase the period in question, the prisoner would be informed of the length of the new period and given the reasons for the increase."The Home Secretary went on to emphasise that before any mandatory life sentence prisoner was released on licence he would consider (among other things) whether the period served by the prisoner was adequate to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence.On 5 December 1994, solicitors acting for the applicant wrote to the Home Secretary (Mr. Howard) seeking to persuade him that the period of nearly 30 years which the applicant had then served in custody was sufficient to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence in respect of the two offences of which she had been convicted. Reliance was placed in particular on the lesser responsibility of the applicant, as compared with Brady, for the commission of these crimes; on Brady's personal domination and intimidation of her at the time; on the applicant's full disclosure of her role to the police in 1987; and on her exceptional progress during her period in prison. At this stage the applicant did not know what the judges had recommended or what ministers had decided in relation to her tariff term. On 7 December 1994, however, the Home Secretary (Mr. Howard) announced his policy in relation to prisoners serving a whole life tariff (Hansard (H.C. Debates), cols. 234-235: written answer). He said:"In addition, I have decided that for those life sentence prisoners for whom it is decided that the requirements of retribution and deterrence can be satisfied only by their remaining in prison for the whole of their life, there will in future be an additional ministerial review when the prisoner has been in custody for 25 years. The purpose of this review will be solely to consider whether the whole life tariff should be converted to a tariff of a determinate period. The review will be confined to the considerations of retribution and deterrence. Where appropriate, further ministerial reviews will normally take place at five-yearly intervals thereafter. Existing prisoners who fall into this category and who have already served 25 years or more in custody will not be disadvantaged. Their cases will be reviewed by ministers as soon as is practicable and after any representations they may wish to make."This is the first policy statement challenged in these proceedings.Following this announcement, on 15 December 1994, the Home Office sent the applicant an important letter seeking to comply with the House of Lords' decision in the Doody case. In this letter, the applicant was told of the recommendations made by the judges, of the provisional 30-year tariff set in January 1985, and of the decision in July 1990 to impose a whole life tariff. The letter said:"In July 1990 ministers again reviewed the question of what your tariff should be. They were then aware of your confession to the police in February 1987, but took it into account only in so far as it shed light on the circumstances of the offences for which you were sentenced to life imprisonment for murder. The Secretary of State of the day concluded on 26 July 1990 that a whole life tariff should be imposed in your case. He did so taking into account the circumstances of the offences in question and having regard to other comparable cases."The applicant was invited to make representations if she wished to ask for her whole life tariff to be reduced to a shorter determinate term.On 24 November 1995 solicitors for the applicant wrote to the Parole Board, enclosing detailed representations on the applicant's behalf drafted by leading counsel and a letter by the applicant herself, and also enclosing a number of reports from highly reputable sources urging that the applicant was no longer a danger to the public and should be released. A statement from the police, substantially accepting the applicant's account of her involvement, was included. On 19 January 1996 the applicant's solicitors wrote to the Home Secretary enclosing representations to him on the length of the applicant's tariff and on her application for release on parole. The Home Secretary (Mr. Howard) gave his response just over a year later, on 3 February 1997, when the applicant was informed that he had carefully considered the representations submitted on her behalf and had set her tariff afresh at whole life. His reasons were attached to the decision, and read:"In giving fresh consideration to your tariff the Secretary of State has taken fully into account the representations submitted on your behalf as well as the trial judge's letter of 8 May 1966, and the views of Lord Widgery C.J. in his letter of 2 March 1978 and Lord Lane C.J. in his letters of 12 January 1982 and 10 January 1985. He has also taken into account your description to the Greater Manchester police of your involvement in the offences of which you were convicted and of how you came under the influence of Ian Brady. The Secretary of State notes that you were convicted on 6 May 1966 of the murders of Lesley Ann Downey aged 10, and Edward Evans aged 17, and sentenced to life imprisonment. He also notes that you were convicted at the same time of being an accessory after the fact to the murder of John Kilbride aged 12, for which you were sentenced to 7 years' imprisonment. The Secretary of State attaches weight to the premeditated nature of the two separate murders of two wholly innocent victims, and the pitiless part which you played in them. In particular the Secretary of State attaches weight to the circumstances of the murder of Lesley Ann Downey. He has had regard to the fact that you drove Ian Brady to a fair ground on Boxing Day 1964 to look together for a victim in the knowledge on your own admission that three young people had previously been abducted, put to death, and buried on the moors. Having seen the 10-year-old girl on her own you watched and targeted her before enticing her to go with you to your house where preparations had been made to take indecent photographs. On arrival she was forcibly gagged with your active participation, put in terror of what would happen to her, made to undress and photographed in obscene poses. She was then murdered. You drove the vehicle which took her body to the moors where she was buried. About nine months later you drove Ian Brady into Manchester where a young stranger of 17, Edward Evans, was lured to your car and driven by you back to your house where he was savagely murdered by being struck on the head with 14 blows with an axe and strangled with a ligature. At trial you denied any responsibility for either of these two murders or any knowledge of John Kilbride.The Secretary of State does not accept that a minimumtariff period of 25 years as recommended by Lord Lane is adequate to reflect the gravity of these offences. Having regard to all the circumstances of your case the Secretary of State has concluded that a whole life tariff is necessary to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence in your case."This is the first decision which is the subject of challenge in these proceedings.On 4 March 1997 the applicant was informed that the Parole Board had not recommended her release on licence, but had recommended her transfer to open prison conditions with a further review two years thereafter. The opinion of the Parole Board, disclosed to the applicant, was:"Ms Hindley has, over a sustained period, examined the issues surrounding her offences and relationship with Mr. Brady. Evidence in the reports indicate that she is suitable for release. Her age and medical condition do not require her to be held further in conditions of security. To date, her changes have taken place within closed/secure conditions and therefore no plans for release have been formulated. The release plan will need to [take] account of her need for structured support, her progress to date and her need for anonymity whilst holding to the reporting conditions of life licence."The applicant was informed that the Home Secretary was minded to reject the recommendation of the Parole Board on the ground that, since the applicant had a whole life tariff, there was no purpose in transferring her to open conditions in order to prepare her for release. The applicant's solicitors responded promptly, informing the Home Office on 11 April 1997 that the lawfulness of the applicant's whole life tariff was challenged, and urging that the applicant was no longer a risk to society and should be released.On 10 November 1997 the Home Secretary (Mr. Straw) made a statement in Parliament giving his response to the decision of the House of Lords in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, and also wrote to the applicant's solicitors (Hansard (H.C. Debates), cols. 419-420: written answer). In his statement the Home Secretary made clear that he would continue the practice of his predecessor in setting and reviewing tariffs of adult murderers. He said:"With regard to the discretion to alter tariff, I reiterate that the view which I take (or a minister acting under my authority takes) at the beginning of a mandatory life sentence, of the period necessary to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence is an initial view of the minimum period necessary to satisfy those requirements. It therefore remains possible for me, or a future Secretary of State, exceptionally to revise that view of the minimum period, either by reducing it, or by increasing it where I, or a successor in my office, conclude that, putting aside questions of risk, the minimum requirements of retribution and deterrence will not have been satisfied at the expiry of the period which had previously been determined.The procedure for considering any increase of a tariff once set will include the opportunity for the prisoner to make representations after being informed that the Secretary of State is minded to increase tariff, and to be given reasons for any subsequent decision to increase it. So far as the potential for a reduction in tariff is concerned, I shall be open to the possibility that, in exceptional circumstances, including for example exceptional progress by the prisoner whilst in custody, a review and reduction of the tariff may be appropriate. I shall have this possibility in mind when reviewing at the 25-year point the cases of prisoners given a whole life tariff and in that respect will consider issues beyond the sole criteria of retribution and deterrence described in the answer given on 7 December 1994. Prisoners will continue to be given the opportunity to make representations and to have access to the material before me. I intend to apply these policies in respect of all tariffs for adult murderers, whether or not they were originally set before 27 July 1993 and whether or not they were originally fixed by me personally, or a minister acting on my behalf, or by or on behalf of a previous holder of my office. In the Pierson case, where the tariff has now been quashed, I intend to invite representations from the prisoner before resetting tariff at a level which I consider appropriate."This is the second policy statement challenged in these proceedings.In the letter, the applicant's solicitors were invited to make any representations relating to her progress in prison which they thought might warrant a reduction in her tariff term. This invitation was repeated in a letter to the applicant's solicitors of 19 November 1997, in which they were informed that subject to consideration of whether it might be appropriate to reduce the applicant's tariff because of her exceptional progress in prison (on which the Home Secretary would not form a concluded view until the applicant had had a fair opportunity to make any further written representations she might wish), he saw no reason to depart from the conclusion of his predecessor that a whole life tariff was appropriate in all the circumstances of the applicant's case, applying the policy statement announced on 10 November 1997. The decision communicated in this letter is the second decision challenged in these proceedings.In a written Parliamentary answer given on 1 December 1997 to a question about his reasons for deciding to keep the applicant in prison for the rest of her life the Home Secretary (Mr. Straw) said that, having looked at the papers considered by his predecessor, he saw no reason to depart from his decision, although he would be willing to consider any representations which he might receive on the reduction of the applicant's whole life tariff.The grounds of challenge(1) The lawfulness of a whole life tariffMr. Fitzgerald for the applicant argued that it was unlawful for a whole life tariff to be set in any case, that is, for a decision to be made that the term to be served by a mandatory life sentence prisoner for purposes of retribution and deterrence (irrespective of risk considerations)should be the term of a person's natural life. Such a tariff, he submitted, was inconsistent with the intentions and expectations of those who enacted the abolition of the death penalty in 1965, with the practice adopted in the years following abolition and with the procedures for parole introduced in 1967.I cannot for my part accept that argument. I can see no reason, in principle, why a crime or crimes, if sufficiently heinous, should not be regarded as deserving lifelong incarceration for purposes of pure punishment. One can readily accept that in requiring a sentence of imprisonment for life on those convicted of murder Parliament did not intend the sentence to mean what it said in all, or even a majority, of cases, but there is nothing to suggest that Parliament intended that it should never (even leaving risk considerations aside) mean what it said. When, in section 29 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, Parliament again conferred a wide discretion on the Home Secretary to release mandatory life sentence prisoners, it did so in the knowledge (from Mr. Howard's statement of 7 December 1994) that some such prisoners were subject to whole life tariffs. Successive Lord Chief Justices have regarded such a tariff as lawful, and I share their view.Mr. Fitzgerald was, in my opinion, on stronger ground in arguing that a whole life tariff with no provision for account to be taken of exceptional circumstances, such as exceptional progress in prison, was unlawful. A Home Secretary cannot of course bind his successors, so even if he fixes a whole life tariff in a particular case and decides never to look at the case again, he cannot prevent his successors doing so. But, more importantly, he may not unlawfully fetter his own discretion. Section 61 of the Criminal Justice Act 1967, section 35 of the Criminal Justice Act 1991 and section 29 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 conferred a very broad discretion on the Home Secretary. He is free to formulate and follow a policy, and for administrative reasons it is necessary for him to do so. But he must not adopt a policy which admits of no exceptions, whatever the facts of the case.If authority be needed for that proposition, it may be found in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318. In his 1983 statement Mr. Brittan had indicated, with reference to mandatory life sentence prisoners, that prison governors would be told to report at once any exceptional development requiring action and that the procedures adopted would ensure that the Home Secretary could consider any special circumstances or exceptional progress which might justify changing a prisoner's review date. It was argued that the Home Secretary had unlawfully fettered his discretion. This argument was rejected. Lord Scarman, giving the decision of a unanimous House, said, at p. 336:"The question, therefore, is simply: did the new policy constitute a refusal to consider the cases of prisoners within the specified classes? The answer is clearly 'no.' Consideration of a case is not excluded by a policy which provides that exceptional circumstances or compelling reasons must be shown because of the weight to be attached to the nature of the offence, the length of the sentence and the factors of deterrence, retribution, public confidence, all of which it was the duty of the Secretary of State to consider. And the Secretary of Stateaccepted the invitation of the board to continue to refer to the board all cases of eligible prisoners notwithstanding the adoption of the new policy."Following this approach, it appears to me that Mr. Howard did, in his Parliamentary statement of 7 December 1994, unlawfully fetter his discretion, since he expressly said that the purpose of periodical reviews would be solely to consider whether the whole life tariff should be converted to a tariff of a determinate period and should be confined to the considerations of retribution and deterrence. By that he must be taken to have meant that no consideration would be given to factors such as exceptional progress in prison. The applicant's challenge to that statement of policy is in my judgment made good. The statement of Mr. Straw on 10 November 1997 did, however, remedy this defect, since he then stated that so far as the potential for a reduction in tariff was concerned he would be open to the possibility that in exceptional circumstances, including for example exceptional progress by the prisoner whilst in custody, a review and reduction of the tariff might be appropriate. I accordingly conclude that the policy now in force is legally unobjectionable on this ground.(2) The lawfulness of increasing the applicant's tariffMr. Fitzgerald argued that it was unlawful for a Home Secretary to increase a tariff term once set. In setting a tariff the Home Secretary was, to all intents and purposes, in the position of a sentencing judge. He was accordingly unable to increase a tariff once set, just as a judge is in general unable to increase a sentence passed in court. To increase a sentence or a tariff term is contrary to principle, unfair to the defendant or prisoner, prejudicial to the appearance of justice and liable to undermine confidence in the integrity of the sentencing or tariff-fixing process.Mr. Pannick for the Home Secretary resisted this argument. He relied on the broad discretion conferred on the Home Secretary in the legislative provisions already referred to. He pointed out that the process of fixing a tariff and consulting the judges before doing so was an entirely extra-statutory procedure, one which successive Home Secretaries had chosen to adopt although not bound to do so. It was for the Home Secretary to decide, within the bounds of legality, how his discretion would be exercised. It was properly exercised by setting, and also in a proper case by increasing, a tariff. He had made a public announcement of his policy. Parliament had enacted section 29, without circumscribing the Home Secretary's discretion, in full knowledge of his publicly stated policy of increasing tariffs in exceptional circumstances.Both Mr. Fitzgerald and Mr. Pannick were to a large extent repeating before us arguments which they had already advanced in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Pierson [1998] A.C. 539, and both sought to draw support from their Lordships' speeches in that case.Lord Steyn and Lord Hope of Craighead both held, adversely to the Home Secretary, that since he was exercising what was in all essentials a sentencing function he had acted unlawfully in effectively increasing Pierson's tariff term. To that extent, these speeches are undoubtedly helpfulto the applicant. But Mr. Pannick submitted to us that both Lord Steyn and Lord Hope founded their statements of principle on the condition that the tariff had been fixed and communicated to the prisoner. Here, Mr. Pannick argued, the applicant's tariff term of 30 years (which Mr. Howard and Mr. Straw were said to have unlawfully increased) had been neither fixed nor communicated to the applicant. It is accordingly necessary for us to ask whether the suggested condition was indeed a condition of the principle stated in their Lordships' speeches and, if so, whether a 30-year tariff had indeed been fixed in the applicant's case and communicated to her.The speeches of Lord Steyn and Lord Hope are of some length, and their full effect cannot be easily summarised or conveyed by selective quotation. It is, however, noteworthy that at the outset of his speech Lord Steyn said, at p. 584d:"The principal question arising on this appeal is whether the Home Secretary has a general power to increase a tariff which he or a predecessor fixed and communicated to a prisoner."He referred, at p. 585g, to a general principle of the common law that a lawful sentence pronounced by a judge may not retrospectively be increased. He said, at p. 586g:"The general principle of our law is therefore that a convicted criminal is entitled to know where he stands so far as his punishment is concerned. He is entitled to legal certainty about his punishment."Having concluded that the Home Secretary, in making a decision on punishment, is subject to the normal constraints binding on a sentencing judge, Lord Steyn concluded that the Home Secretary did not have the power to increase a tariff lawfully fixed, and was not entitled to introduce a power to increase tariffs. In his conclusion Lord Steyn said, at p. 592:"It was agreed before your Lordships' House that the Home Secretary's decision letter of 6 May 1994 did communicate a decision to Mr. Pierson to increase the tariff in his case. That decision was in my judgment unlawful and ought to be quashed. My conclusion is based on the proposition that the Home Secretary has no general power to increase a tariff fixed and communicated. That leaves unaffected the question whether in exceptional or special circumstances arising from the facts of a particular case the Home Secretary may have such a power, e.g. where quite plainly the judge and the Home Secretary have been misled. Such qualifications were not explored in argument. I express no view on it."Lord Hope in his speech traced the history in some detail, and drew a distinction between the Home Secretary's discretion in relation to release and his role in relation to fixing the measure of punishment. Referring to the Home Secretary, he said, at p. 603:"He is not disabled from taking a different view from the judges about the minimum period, because the power resides with him alone to decide on the release date. But he is bound by considerations of substantive fairness to observe the same rules as the judges if the viewwhich he takes about the length of the minimum period is concerned solely with the question of punishment. This means that he cannot increase a minimum period which he or his predecessor has decided upon once that view has been communicated to the prisoner simply because he now thinks, on further reflection, that the punishment is inadequate."He observed:"The minimum standard of fairness does not permit a person to be punished twice for the same offence. Nor does it permit a person, once he has been told what his punishment is to be, to be given in substitution for it a more severe punishment."He expressed his conclusion in this way, at p. 604:"For these reasons I am of the opinion that the Home Secretary does not have a general power to increase the period which he or his predecessor has fixed as the minimum period to be served by a mandatory life prisoner in custody in order to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence for his crime, once his decision has been issued and communicated. This is not to say that the minimum period may not be increased where exceptional circumstances make this necessary. But the decision to increase the minimum period was not, in this case, made in the light of any exceptional circumstances. It was made in the belief, which I consider to be erroneous, that it was within the power of the Home Secretary to increase the minimum period simply because he disagreed with the view formed by his predecessor about the appropriate level of punishment. As that view had already been made known to the applicant as being the decision which had been taken in his case, it was no longer within his power to increase the minimum period."Reading these passages, drafted with obvious care and precision, I find it impossible to regard the conditions of fixing the tariff and communicating it to the prisoner as other than fundamental to the conclusion which their Lordships reached. This conclusion is in no way surprising. Great importance was attached to the analogy between a sentencing and a tariff-fixing function, and in the ordinary way a judge passing sentence tells the defendant then and there, and as clearly as he can, what the sentence is. The principle of fairness on which their Lordships relied finds its primary rationale in the need for a sentenced defendant to know, once and for all, where he stands.Mr. Fitzgerald submitted that a 30-year tariff was fixed for the applicant by Mr. Brittan in 1985. If "provisional" meant anything, it only meant that the tariff could be revised downwards. Mr. Pannick submitted that the 1985 decision meant what it said: a tariff was fixed provisionally because it was not fixed definitely. If the Home Secretary had only wanted to reserve a right to revise the tariff downwards, he had no need to make a provisional determination since no one had ever doubted his power and right to revise a tariff downwards. The provisional determination enabled him to revise the length of the term either upwards or downwards.The 1985 decision must be considered in context. At that time the Home Secretary cannot have intended or contemplated that his decision would be communicated to the applicant. He envisaged that a local review committee would consider the applicant's case, but probably defer a review for five years. He had not, as Mr. Howard later did, asserted a power to increase a tariff once set, and had indeed made plain that he would not increase a tariff once a first formal review date had been given. He cannot have supposed it necessary to reserve a right to reduce a tariff term. The evidence shows that the provisional fixing of a tariff was an exceptional step. The natural inference is that the tariff was set provisionally at 30 years because the Home Secretary recognised that it might be judged appropriate to imprison the applicant for a longer period than that. Certainly that is the natural inference in relation to Brady, whose tariff was provisionally set at 40 years, since up to then everyone who had expressed a view had favoured lifelong imprisonment in his case. The expression "provisional" must mean the same in each case. In my judgment, Mr. Brittan reached a provisional conclusion that the applicant's tariff term should be 30 years because he wished to reserve the right for himself or his successors to revise that term whether upwards or downwards. The tariff term was not "fixed" or "set" at that time.It is quite plain that the provisional tariff term of 30 years was never communicated to the applicant, and she does not suggest that it was. She says that she believed she had a tariff of determinate length, and was encouraged by the Parole Board decision of May 1985 to review her case in five years' time but not to review Brady's for ten. What she understood was that her tariff term was one of 30 years or less. She did not understand it to be more than 30 years, and had never been led to believe that she had a whole life tariff. She was not aware of any mandatory life sentence prisoner with a whole life tariff. All this may be readily accepted. But the fact remains that the tariff term was not communicated to her. We do not know what she would have been told had she then been given any indication of the length of her tariff term. All the official communications and statements that we have seen were careful to avoid giving any indication of how long she should expect to remain in prison. In 1989 she wrote to the Home Office pleading to be told her tariff date. She was not told.In the light of the law as declared in Reg. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Doody [1994] 1 A.C. 531, it is plain that the applicant should have been told of any decision on her tariff term, of any departure from the judicial recommendations and of the Home Secretary's reasons for departing from the judicial recommendations. It is hard on the applicant that she should be prejudiced by the Home Secretary's failure to do what the law now says he should have done. But it is difficult to see how the applicant can be in a better position than the two mandatory life sentence prisoners whose cases were considered in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318. They had never had tariffs set, but were grossly disadvantaged by a change of policy which led to their prospective release dates being significantly postponed. Their challenges to the implementation of that change of policy did not succeed. Lord Scarman said, at p. 338:"It is said that the refusal to except them from the new policy was an unlawful act on the part of the Secretary of State in that his decisionfrustrated their expectation. But what was their legitimate expectation? Given the substance and purpose of the legislative provisions governing parole, the most that a convicted prisoner can legitimately expect is that his case will be examined individually in the light of whatever policy the Secretary of State sees fit to adopt provided always that the adopted policy is a lawful exercise of the discretion conferred upon him by the statute. Any other view would entail the conclusion that the unfettered discretion conferred by the statute upon the minister can in some cases be restricted so as to hamper, or even to prevent, changes of policy. Bearing in mind the complexity of the issues which the Secretary of State has to consider and the importance of the public interest in the administration of parole I cannot think that Parliament intended the discretion to be restricted in this way."It would seem to me that this remains good law.If the foregoing conclusions are correct, it is unnecessary to consider whether, as Mr. Pannick briefly suggested, it is open to the Home Secretary to rely on the possibility left open by Lord Steyn and Lord Hope, that there were here exceptional circumstances which justified an increase in a tariff previously set and communicated. The exceptional circumstance relied on was the revelation by the applicant in her 1987 confession that she had been involved to a greater extent than previously appreciated in the two murders of which she had been convicted, and that those two murders were the culmination of a series of five murders of which the applicant had known when luring to their deaths the victims she had been convicted of killing.In their speeches in the Pierson case [1998] A.C. 539, Lord Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Lloyd of Berwick accepted the Home Secretary's argument that it was within the wide statutory discretion conferred upon him to increase a tariff term once set. Their speeches are wholly supportive of the Home Secretary's argument in this application, and it was not suggested that they gave assistance to the applicant.We heard much argument about the proper understanding of the speech delivered in the Pierson case by Lord Goff of Chieveley. He referred to four parliamentary statements of policy by successive Home Secretaries, and recounted the facts giving rise to the challenge by that applicant. He attached importance to the fact that Mr. Brittan had not in November 1983 asserted any power to increase a tariff term once set, and had indeed made it plain that such an increase would not be made. He said, at p. 568:"The penal element in the applicant's sentence was fixed as soon as practicable after his conviction and sentence on 8 July 1985, and so must have been fixed at the time when Mr. Hurd's statement 3 was applicable. On the basis of that statement the applicant would expect that the penal element so fixed would not (apart from the exceptional circumstance, which is not material in the present case) be increased. That expectation was, however, liable to be displaced in the event of a new policy being adopted by the Secretary of State which was inconsistent with it: see In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, 338, per LordScarman. I turn, therefore, to consider the impact of Mr. Howard's policy statement of 27 July 1993 . . . "Lord Goff concluded that Mr. Howard's policy statement of 27 July 1993 did not, properly read, cover the case of any prisoner whose tariff term had been set before the making of that policy statement. He drew attention to Mr. Howard's assertion that the view taken by him or another minister under his authority at the beginning of a mandatory life sentence was an initial view of the tariff term, and observed that in the case of Pierson the view taken by the former Secretary of State had plainly not been an initial view. He accordingly concluded that Mr. Howard's statement was inapplicable to that applicant. Lord Goff said, at p. 569:"The Secretary of State did not claim to be entitled to depart from the policy applicable in the applicant's case. Had he done so, the question would have arisen whether the applicant could invoke the principle of legitimate expectation in the light of Lord Scarman's speech in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, 338."It would seem from this last passage that Lord Goff accepted the right of the Home Secretary to increase a tariff previously set, in accordance with a policy duly adopted and formerly announced, subject to any argument a prisoner might be able to found on legitimate expectation. If this is so, it would appear that a majority of their Lordships accepted the lawfulness of such a power in principle. But in any event, if my analysis of the speeches of Lord Steyn and Lord Hope is correct, the principle which they upheld would not apply to a case such as the present if I am right to conclude that the 30-year tariff term was not fixed and communicated to the applicant. This approach to the role of the Home Secretary in relation to mandatory life sentence prisoners is in my view wholly consistent with the analysis of that role made by the House of Lords in In re Findlay and the Doody case [1994] 1 A.C. 531.(3) Other grounds for challenging the lawfulness of the whole life tariff determinations made in 1990 and 1997(i) Failure to make disclosure and invite representations as required by the Doody case.The whole life tariff determination made by Mr. Waddington in July 1990 plainly violated the procedural requirements laid down by the House of Lords in the Doody case, and if that decision were of continuing effect it would be quashed. It was, however, overtaken by later decisions, and it is not suggested that the whole life tariff determinations made by Mr. Howard in February 1997 and Mr. Straw in November 1997 were similarly flawed. There is accordingly no available challenge on this ground open to the applicant.(ii) IrrationalityIn criticising the decisions of Mr. Howard and Mr. Straw as irrational, Mr. Fitzgerald relied on a large number of matters. He drew attention particularly to the factual background and the evidence that the applicant had been drugged and assaulted, that threats had been made against herand her family, that she had been psychologically dominated by an older man, and that she had found herself in a situation from which she had been unable to escape without the risk of herself being prosecuted for murder at a time when the capital penalty was still in force. Mr. Fitzgerald emphasised that the applicant was the only woman (other than Rosemary West) subject to a whole life tariff, and the only person so subject who had not been the actual murderer. He referred to others who had themselves committed crimes as bad as or worse than those of the applicant who had received shorter tariff terms. He pointed out that the applicant's responsibility and degree of criminality had from the outset been regarded as less than that of Brady, and he drew attention to the great disparity between the minimum term of 25 years recommended by Lord Lane C.J. and the term which the applicant might now, on a whole life tariff, have to serve.These are all very relevant matters for consideration. So also is the fact that the applicant was convicted of two horrific and macabre murders of young victims which, since she was the driver of the car used when the victims were lured to their deaths and when their bodies were buried on the moors, could not have been committed without her. The tapes which recorded the ordeal of Lesley Ann Downey recorded also the participation of the applicant. These two murders were the culmination of a series of five, of which she had knowledge when taking part in them.It is relevant to recall that the initial view of Lord Lane, C.J., with his vast experience, was that the applicant, like Brady, should never be released. On reflection he modified his view to some extent. When doing so he did not know the full details later revealed: he was accordingly ignorant of the extent to which the applicant had been intimidated, coerced and suborned; but he was also unaware that three young victims had to the applicant's knowledge been previously abducted, put to death and buried on the moors at the time when she committed the two murders of which she was convicted. The whole life tariff fixed by Mr. Howard and Mr. Straw did indeed represent a great increase on the 25-year minimum term recommended by Lord Lane C.J., but this is a highly judgmental matter on which reasonable minds may differ.Mr. Fitzgerald raised, but did not press, an argument that if a whole life tariff was appropriate for Brady, who on any showing was the instigator and prime executor of these crimes, it could not be appropriate also for the applicant as the lesser offender. But this must be wrong. If Brady satisfied by a wide margin the criterion for imposing the maximum penalty permitted at law, that does not lead to the conclusion that the applicant did not satisfy it.Mr. Fitzgerald criticised the applicant's whole life tariff as reflecting a retrospective judgment on her criminality, wrongly taking account of experience since the date of her conviction. It would, I accept, be wrong to punish the applicant for the conduct of others during the years of her confinement. But there is nothing to suggest that the Home Secretaries have wrongly taken account of later experience to pass a retrospective judgment. Murders of this kind were as roundly condemned in 1965 as they are today. The letters written much nearer the time reflect this condemnation. This is not in truth an irrationality argument.The threshold of irrationality for purposes of judicial review is a high one. This is because responsibility for making the relevant decision rests with another party and not with the court. It is not enough that we might, if the responsibility for making the relevant decision rested with us, make a decision different from that of the appointed decision-maker. To justify intervention by the court, the decision under challenge must fall outside the bounds of any decision open to a reasonable decision-maker. As Lord Hailsham of St. Marylebone L.C. observed in In re W. (An Infant) [1971] A.C. 682, 700, in quite a different context:"The question in any given case is whether a parental veto comes within the band of possible reasonable decisions and not whether it is right or mistaken. Not every reasonable exercise of judgment is right, and not every mistaken exercise of judgment is unreasonable. There is a band of decisions within which no court should seek to replace the individual's judgment with his own."(iii) Defeat of the applicant's legitimate expectationIt was argued for the applicant that the decisions of Mr. Waddington in 1990 and Mr. Howard and Mr. Straw in 1997 defeated the applicant's legitimate expectation that she would not serve a term of more than 30 years. Since the 30-year determination was provisional and never disclosed to her, I cannot for my part accept that she had any such legitimate expectation. I can readily accept that she expected to serve a fixed term of years and did not expect this to exceed 30 years, but I cannot accept that this expectation was founded on any statement made by or on behalf of any of the Home Secretaries who have played a part in this history. If, however, that conclusion is wrong, the applicant's argument in my judgment founders on the passage in the speech of Lord Scarman in In re Findlay [1985] A.C. 318, 338 which has already been quoted. The terms of Mr. Straw's parliamentary statement of 10 November 1997 have met the point on which Lord Goff based his decision in the Pierson case [1997] 3 W.L.R. 492, as I understood Mr. Fitzgerald to acknowledge.(iv) Want of reasonsMr. Fitzgerald relied on the very full representations made to the Home Secretary on behalf of the applicant and complained that the Home Secretary had not given adequate reasons for concluding, despite those representations, that a whole life tariff was appropriate. In particular, Mr. Fitzgerald relied on the applicant's account of Brady's role in commission of these crimes, his relationship with her, and his threats, intimidation and coercion which induced her to act as she did. He argued that it was wholly unclear from the Home Secretary's response of 3 February 1997 whether he accepted the factual truth of those representations or not, and his reasons left it unclear whether he had even understood the points being made on the applicant's behalf. His statement in the reasons that he had taken into account the applicant's description to the Greater Manchester police of her involvement in the offences of which she had been convicted and of how she had come under the influence of Brady meant no more, Mr. Fitzgerald argued, than that hehad read the materials put before him. The Home Secretary's reasons were defective, and those deficiencies could not be made good by the affidavit of an official sworn after the event.The Home Office letter of 3 February 1997 said that the Home Secretary had carefully considered the representations submitted on the applicant's behalf. If one accepts that statement, and there is no basis for rejecting it, one cannot conclude that the Home Secretary failed to understand the points being made on the applicant's behalf, which indeed were very clearly and cogently expressed. When it was stated, in the reasons given, that the Home Secretary had taken into account the applicant's description of her involvement and of how she had come under the influence of Brady, it was clearly intended to convey that this material had been weighed in the balance by the Home Secretary when making his decision. If he had rejected this account - which, in the absence of other evidence, he could scarcely have done - he would not have taken it into account. In an affidavit of 17 July 1997 sworn on behalf of the Home Secretary, Mr. T. C. Morris deposed:"21. The Secretary of State considered that, even if (as the applicant contends) Ian Brady initiated and planned the crimes and corrupted, intimidated and dominated the applicant, her actions justify a whole life tariff, given the appalling circumstances of these offences and her role in them. The Secretary of State had in mind that the two murders of which the applicant was convicted occurred about nine months apart and that the applicant was, at the time of the second murder 23 years of age: see the document entitled 'Synopsis of Myra Hindley's account to the Greater Manchester police in 1987 of how she came under Ian Brady's influence' . . ."This confirms that the natural reading of the Home Secretary's reasons is the correct reading. The affidavit does not in my view add to what is stated in the reasons themselves.The duty of the Home Secretary was to tell the applicant why he considered it appropriate to fix a whole life tariff in her case and why he considered that a term longer than the minimum recommended by Lord Lane C.J. was called for. It was not incumbent on him to reply, as if in a pleading, to each point made for the applicant. Did he make clear the grounds for his decision? In my view he did, basing himself on the premeditated murders of two young victims and the pitiless part the applicant had played in them, with knowledge on her own admission that three young people had previously been abducted, put to death and buried on the moors. He attached importance, in particular, to the appalling circumstances in which Lesley Ann Downey had been tortured and killed. The Home Secretary did not accept that the minimum period of 25 years recommended by Lord Lane C.J. was adequate to reflect the gravity of the applicant's offences and concluded that a whole life tariff was necessary to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence in her case. The question whether one agrees or disagrees with that conclusion does not arise. Some would agree, others disagree. I cannot, however, accept that the applicant was left in doubt why the Home Secretary had reached the view he did and I do not think any useful purpose would beserved by requiring further detail of his thinking. Since, for reasons already given, Mr. Brittan had not set a 30-year tariff in 1985 it was not in my view incumbent on Mr. Howard to give his reasons for regarding that term as an inadequate punishment, but in effect he did so.Mr. Straw has adopted the decision of his predecessor, implicitly adopting the reasons then given. He was not in my view under a duty to give any additional reasons.Conclusions(1) The decisions of Mr. Howard on 3 February 1997 and Mr. Straw on 19 November 1997 were not in my judgment unlawful. Neither decision is vitiated by lack of reasons.(2) The policy announced by Mr. Howard on 7 December 1994 was in my judgment unlawful in failing to make any allowance for the possibility that in exceptional circumstances, such as exceptional progress by a prisoner while in custody, a review and reduction of a mandatory life sentence prisoner's tariff term might be made.(3) The policy announced by Mr. Straw on 10 November 1997, somewhat rhetorically described in the applicant's amended notice of application, is not unlawful.This application is of great importance to the applicant as also to those who continue to suffer from her crimes. But I part from the case uneasily conscious that the issues which may really underlie the case are not before us. There is room for serious debate whether the task of determining how long convicted murderers should serve in prison as punishment for their crimes should be undertaken by the judiciary (as in the case of discretionary life prisoners) or, as now, by the executive. That is, in large measure, a political and constitutional question. It is not a question for decision by this court. The applicant clearly feels that she is held hostage to public opinion, condemned to pass the rest of her life in prison, although no longer judged a danger to anyone, because of her notoriety and the public obloquy which would fall on any Home Secretary who ordered her release. But the applicant has, no doubt wisely, made no accusation that any Home Secretary has acted in bad faith, or has exercised his discretion under section 61 of the Act of 1967 or section 35 of the Act of 1991 or section 29 of the Act of 1997 for any improper or ulterior purpose, or has taken account of any irrelevant or improper consideration. Had such a charge been made, we should have had to consider it, and any evidence in rebuttal, and also to consider the extent to which, if at all, the Home Secretary may properly take account of public opinion. But this challenge has not been made, and we must confine our decision to the grounds argued before us. Whether the applicant has made exceptional progress in prison and whether, if so, any modification of her current tariff term is appropriate, are questions which the Home Secretary will consider, in the light of any representations made, once the present challenge is finally resolved.JUDGMENTBY-2: Hooper JJUDGMENT-2:Hooper J: I agree with both judgments.JUDGMENTBY-3: Astill JJUDGMENT-3:Astill J: I agree and wish only to add two points.First, I respectfully agree with Lord Bingham of Cornhill C.J. that the policy of the previous Home Secretary was unlawful.The Home Secretary adopted that policy in his 10 November 1997 statement to the House of Commons following the judgment in the Pierson case [1998] A.C. 539. He added:"So far as the potential for a reduction in tariff is concerned, I shall be open to the possibility that, in exceptional circumstances, including for example exceptional progress by the prisoner whilst in custody, a review and reduction of the tariff may be appropriate. I should have this possibility in mind when reviewing at the 25-year point the cases of prisoners given a whole life tariff and in that respect will consider issues beyond the sole criteria of retribution and deterrence, described in the answer given on 7 December 1994." (Hansard (H.C. Debates), cols. 419-420: written answer.)In my judgment, it is that addition which rescues his policy from illegality. If it was at any time to be removed or if only token regard was to be paid to it the Home Secretary's present policy would revert to the illegality of the previous policy. It is also my view that the Home Secretary when rejecting considerations of "exceptional circumstances" should give clear reasons for doing so.Second, I also agree that the then Home Secretary, in his document entitled "Statement of reasons for setting tariff at whole life," gave adequate reasons for his decision. However, in my view, barely so. He stated that he had taken into account the description given by the applicant to the Greater Manchester police of her involvement in the offences and of how she came under the influence of Brady. The Home Secretary did not explain his reasoning beyond "taking those matters into account." It is at least advisable that a Home Secretary should give more detailed reasons for his decision to reject submissions made to him by an applicant.DISPOSITION:Application dismissed.Leave to appeal.SOLICITORS:Solicitors: Taylor Nichol; Treasury Solicitor.