The Hardest Case of All: Myra Hindley, Life Sentences, and the Rule of Law Myra Hindley is still in prison 33 years after her conviction for two murders perpetrated with her lover, lan Brady. These crimes, known as the `Moors Murders' are deeply embedded in the collective consciousness of our society and it is no exaggeration to say that Hindley is popularly considered to be the embodiment of evil. Over the last 5 years she has mounted legal challenges to the Home Secretary's right to determine the length of her detention. In this paper we argue that this single `hard case' has had an irrevocable effect on penal policy in the United Kingdom. Our thesis is that as Hindley has mounted these challenges the position of the Home Secretary has hardened, in the main because of the political impact of any executive action that could lead to her release. Because Hindley is a mandatory life prisoner (MLP) her case has had a profound impact on the law relating to such prisoners, and has prevented it from remaining in step with the law relating to discretionary life prisoners (DLP). Furthermore the position of the executive in this matter is now so firmly entrenched it is highly unlikely that the legal position of the MLP will ever change. As Lord Goff pointed out in recent case dealing with another notorious murder, (R v. SSHD ex parte Venables [1997] 3 All ER 97) the public do not appreciate what a life sentence means [1]. We go further, however, and suggest that the legal position of the life prisoner is often mis- understood and frequently ignored by the academic community. For that reason we shall begin with an outline of the legal position today, before examining the historical background.We shall then examine the Hindley case in detail. The Current Structure There are currently four types of life sentence in English law. They all, how- ever, have one feature in common. That is that once subject to a life sentence the prisoner is never free of it. He or she can be recalled to prison until the end of his or her life [2]. (1) Mandatory life This sentence is the only permissible in English law following a conviction for murder. After sentencing the trial judge makes a recommendation as to the period of years the prisoner should serve to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence (the `tariff'). The Lord Chief Justice, England's senior criminal law judge, then adds his or her comments and recommendation, if different from the trial judge. The Home Secretary then makes the final decision on the tariff figure. Before he does so he makes his initial view known to the prisoner, and discloses the paperwork on which he is basing his decision. The prisoner can then make representations prior to the final setting of the tariff. When the prisoner has served his tariff release on licence is possible, but remains wholly within the discretion of the Home Secretary. In his decision-making role however the Minister is subject to standard administrative law requirements of fairness. (2) Discretionary life As the name implies this sentence is passed at the discretion of the trial judge, following conviction of an offence for which life imprisonment is the maximum. At the sentencing the judge announces the tariff, which is fixed at this point. Immediately at expiration of tariff the prisoner has an oral hearing to determine whether he is fit to be released, the only concern being the risk the prisoner presents to society. The executive branch of government is not involved, save that the Home Secretary is a party at this hearing, which has an adversarial format. (3) Automatic life This was introduced by the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997. It is mandatory, with certain exceptions, following conviction of a second serious violent or sexual offence. It is, however, identical in all other respects to the discretionary life sentence. (4) Detention at Her Majesty's Pleasure (HMP) This is the mandatory sentence passed on under-18s convicted of murder. Following the appeal to the House of Lords by the two boys convicted of the murder of James Bulger, R v. SSHD Ex Parte Venables (op cit) the law was in some state of confusion, with tariff being within the Home Secretary's discretion, and release determined following a hearing before a panel similar to that for DLPs (Livingstone & Owen 1999: 415^418). However, in December 1999 the European Court of Human Rights gave judgment in the case of the Bulger killers (Tv. United Kingdom;V v. UnitedKingdom; The Times: 17 December 1999). Following this the Home Secretary made an announcement in the House of Commons on 13th March that henceforth tariffs for HMPs would be set by the sentencing judge, bringing this sentence totally in line with DLPs. The Genealogy of the Life Sentence Prior to the 1950s the law in this area was relatively simple, particularly as regards murder, as there was just one sentenceödeath. Any commutation of this remained in the gift originally of the monarch and later of the Home Secretary (Blom-Cooper & Morris 1996). Life imprisonment had also been the maximum sentence for many crimes (cf. Offences Against the Person Act 1861), but it was not until the 1950s that the discretionary life sentence was developed as a penal technique. As Fitzgerald points out, it was then that the judiciary began to use this sentence for the preventative detention of `dan- gerous offenders' who had been convicted of serious violent or sexual offences carrying the life sentence (Fitzgerald 1995: 40). In 1965 the death penalty was finally abolished and it was in the same period that the English courts began to lay down the principles that governed the imposing of a discretionary life sentence. These were generally that the offence was very serious, the defen- dant was unstable and likely to reoffend, and that the consequences of such reoffending would be especially injurious to the others (R v. Hodgson (1968) 52 Cr. App.R. 113). The abolition of the death penalty was not a smooth process. As Blom- Cooper and Morris point out, moreover, a myth surrounds the process. It is popularly believed, and according to them untrue, that the retaining of a mandatory life sentence for murder was part of a bargain struck when the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) 1965 Act was going through Parliament. Whatever the truth of this, it is beyond doubt that the difficult position of MLPs is a direct consequence of that Act, as there was concern at the time that the Home Secretary, having the power to release MLPs, would be too lenient and release prisoners on licence too easily. This was why the Act spe- cified that the incumbent Home Secretary must consult with the trial judge and the Lord Chief Justice in both setting the tariff and deciding on release (Coker & Martin 1985: 14^15). More protection against politically-determined leniency was provided by the Criminal Justice Act 1967, which established the Parole Board, a new body which had the task of examining the fitness for release of all life sentence prisoners. The power to release remained with the Home Secretary, but in future no release could take place without a prior recommendation of the Board. It appears overall that in the post-war period the focus of attention in penal policy making was the abolition of the death penalty. Less thought, however, was given to how the life sentence that re- placed that penalty would be managed.Over the next 10 years there was little change in the position of life sen- tence prisoners, with the tariff-setting exercise and decisions on release remaining wholly in the realm of executive discretion. Consequently little was known about either. In 1979 however, the case of Ex parte St Germain ([1979] QB 425), using the medium of judicial review, saw the beginning of challenges to this discretion, and the birth of prison law as a body of legal doctrine. During the 1970s, following from the case of Golder ([1975] 1 EHHR 524), prisoners had also begun to challenge the prison authorities in the Eur- opean Court of Human Rights (Wilson 1993). This movement to have prisoners recognized as individuals with legally en- forceable rights vis a(c) vis the state reached its apotheosis with the 1983 case of Raymond v. Honey ([1983] 1 A 1) in which LordWilberforce famously remarked that ``[a] convicted prisoner, in spite of his imprisonment, retains all civil rights which are not taken away expressly or by necessary implication. . .'' (p. 10). It was also at this time that the Government began to address the issue of life tariffs and release from prison. Following a rise in public concern at the levels of violent crime and specific cases in which released prisoners had com- mitted such crimes (Coker & Martin 1985: 29^30), the then Home Secretary, Leon Brittan, issued a policy statement on 30 November 1983 (49 HC Official Report (6th Series) written answers cols 505^507). The importance of this statement was that it was the first time the tariff/post-tariff divide was offi- cially recognized. Of crucial importance for our purposes was the criteria for decisions made around these two stages. The first was defined wholly in terms of retribution and deterrence and the second wholly in terms of risk. Brittan's (1983) policy statement had severe consequences for several prison- ers, and was the subject of a judicial review challenge which eventually reached the House of Lords (In re Findlay [1985] AC 318). Focusing wholly on public law doctrine however, the court was not minded to interfere. Matters rested there until 1986 when a challenge was mounted to the Home Secre- tary's fixing of the tariff for DLPs (R v. SSHD Ex parte Handscomb [1988] 86 Cr.App.R. 59). The Divisional Court in Handscomb was robust in asserting that for DLPs the tariff should be fixed strictly in accordance with the view of the trial judge. Douglas Hurd, the incumbent Home Secretary, acceded to the view of the judiciary in a policy statement made on 23 July 1987 (120 HC Official Report (6th series) written answers cols 347^349). However, although MLPs had not featured in Handscomb Hurd made it clear that the manage- ment of these prisoners' sentences would remain firmly in the hand of the executive. Furthermore there was now a new element added to the equation. As well as retribution and deterrence, in performing the tariff-setting exercise the Home Secretary would in future take into account the ``need to maintain public confidence in the system of justice'' (ibid. col. 349). Meanwhile challenges were being mounted in Europe to the discretionary life sentence system. In Weeks V v. U.K. ([1988] 10 EHHR 293) the European Court of Human Rights examined the procedure for managing discretionarylife sentences and found it to be wanting. Despite the discretionary life system not meeting the U.K.'s obligations under the Convention however, the Gov- ernment did not amend the procedures in question. It was not until another case decided against the Government, Thynne v. U.K. ([1990] 13 EHHR 666), that change took place. The applicants in this case had argued that their con- tinued detention post-tariff without judicial examination was in breach of the Convention. Following this case Discretionary Lifer Panels were established by the Criminal Justice Act 1991. The CJA 91 also further confirmed the power of the Home Secretary to both set tariffs and determine release for MLPs, and this was reconfirmed in the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997. Legal challenges (Doody v. SSHD [1993] 3 All ER 92, Pierson v. SSHD [1997] 3 All ER 577) continued through the 1990s, and despite the system for MLPs becoming fairer and more transparent, the diver- gence between the two sentences seemed set. Myra Hindley's Case: the Background and the Social and Legal Context The background In his judgment of Hindley's 1997 judicial review application (R v. SSHD Ex Parte Hindley [1998] QB 751), the Lord Chief Justice makes a whole paragraph of the following: ``These crimes, and the ensuing trial, received intense publi- city, and aroused deep public enmity towards both Brady and the applicant'' (p. 760). As was made clear in a February 1999 debate in the House of Lords [3], hyperbolic and hysterical press coverage continues to this day (586 HL Offi- cial Report cols 722^724) and contributes to Hindley's continued incarceration despite her being judged no risk. The coverage tends to use terms like `evil monster' (ibid.) and feature a photograph of Hindley taken on arrest which no one who has lived in the U.K. in the last 30 years could fail to recognize. The murders that formed the basis of the case were committed in Manche- ster between 1963 and 1965. Hindley was convicted of two murders and being an accomplice in a third; Brady was convicted of all three murders, and lo- cally, feelings still run high. As one `investigative biography' put it, the case has ``eaten into the soul of a whole city'' (Ritchie 1991; 262). Hindley has achieved iconic status in popular culture as well. One of the most popular rock groups of the 1980s, The Smiths, who were also from Manchester, recorded a song based on the crimes, ``Suffer the Little Children''. In 1997 outrage was caused by the exhibiting of a facsimile of Hindley's arrest photo- graph constructed from childrens' handprints at London's Royal Academy, and two men were arrested after throwing ink and eggs at the work. Numer- ous web sites with `chat pages' devoted to the topic now exist (see for examplehttp://lawlounge.com) and one of the country's leading market research companies, MORI, even conducted a poll about her continued incarceration on the eve of her first judicial review challenge [4]. It is difficult for anyone not resident in the U.K. to fully appreciate the im- pact that the case has had. Historically the murders happened at the dawning of a new age; a young Labour Government had been elected, the Beatles had arrived, and the permissiveness of the `swinging sixties' had supplanted the greyness of the austere 1950s. As we have seen, the death penalty was abol- ished at precisely the time of Brady and Hindley's arrest. The continuing im- pact of the case was assured by Hindley's 1987 admission of complicity in the murder of three other children, and her and Brady's separate visit to the Moors to point out possible grave sites. It is no exaggeration to say that the efforts of the media to secure photographs and the police response to these efforts took on the appearance of military operations. Moreover, as Brady has now been removed to a secure mental hospital (and has made it clear he wishes never to be released) public interest has been focused almost entirely on Hindley. This has resulted in some grotesque occurrences, particularly the appearance of AnnWest, the mother of a victim, at London's High Court for the Divisional Court hearing. MsWest, suffering from cancer and with weeks to live, arrived in a wheelchair and was invited to sit at the front of the court by the Lord Chief Justice. She later gave an interview to the BBC (broadcast 18 December 1997) in which she blamed the stress and strain of the case for her fatal illness. She also accused supporters of Myra Hindley of desecrating her daughter's grave. The social and legal context We saw above how by the mid-1990s the positions of the two life sentences, mandatory and discretionary, were diverging. Factors other than legal chal- lenges to the management of life sentences contributed to this however. In Feb- ruary 1993 two 10-year-olds abducted 2-year-old James Bulger from a shopping centre in Liverpool and tortured and killed him. This sparked a national de- bate about crime and punishment [5]. As Ashworth & Hough (1996) put it, following the Bulger killing ``there was close media attention to several crimes that would hardly have been reported at other times'' (p. 783). It was also in this year that Michael Howard, the incumbent Home Secretary embarked on a crusade that fits Bottoms' (1995) model of `populist punitiveness' (1995: 39). At the Conservative Party Conference in October 1993 he declared that `pris- on works' and announced a programme of more punitive regimes in prison and a backtracking on the sentence liberalizing provisions of the CJA 1991. In the same year, the case of Doody saw a major victory for MLPs. The House of Lords was robust in declaring that the Home Secretary must act fairly in managing mandatory life sentences, finding that ``having regard tothe rights which discretionary life prisoners have'' (op. cit. p. 94), MLPs were entitled to certain rights. These included in particular the right to know the reasons for the Home Secretary's departing from the judicial recommendation on tariff and disclosure of the documents on which the decision was based. A MLP was also entitled from this point forward to make representations before the final tariff was set. The court in Doody however stopped short of judicializ- ing the tariff-setting process. On the contrary, they held that not only was the final decision on tariff the Home Secretary's, but also that he ``is compelled, or at least entitled, to have regard to broader considerations of a public char- acter than those which apply to an ordinary sentencing function'' (p. 105). In reaching this conclusion the court examined a policy statement by a Junior Minister, Angela Rumbold (195 HC Official Report (6th series) cols 309^310). This had reiterated Douglas Hurd's 1987 policy statement but now the issue of the post-tariff release of the MLP had been con£ated with that of tariff setting. After making it clear that the MLP had forfeited ``his liberty to the state for the rest of his days'' she went on: The presumption is, therefore, that the offender should remain in custody until and unless the Home Secretary concludes that the public interest is better served by the prisoner's release than by his continued detention. In exercising his continued discretion in that respect, the Home Secretary must take account, not just of the question of risk, but of how society as a whole would view the prisoner's release at that juncture Following Doody, Michael Howard made his response in Parliament on 27 July 1993 (299 HC Official Report (6th series) written answers cols 861^864), ac- cepting the court's ruling and giving effect to their decision. He went further however; he adopted the view of Angela Rumbold and expanded itöafter quoting the above verbatim he added at the end ``The Home Secretary takes account of the judicial recommendation, but the final decision is his'' (ibid.). There was more; henceforth the tariff set at the beginning of an MLP's sen- tence was no more than an `initial view' and it was open to a Home Secretary to revise it upwards or downwards. Understandably, a legal challenge to this was immediately mounted, finally reaching the House of Lords in July 1997. In Pierson v. SSHD (op. cit.) the court, despite con£icting speeches, held that the tariff-setting exercise was analogous to a sentencing exercise. As Lord Steyn put it: ``The undeniable fact is that in fixing a tariff in an individual case the Home Secretary is making a decision about the punishment of a convicted man''. In reaching its decision the House of Lords relied on an earlier case, that of the convicted killers of James Bulger (Ex parte Venables, op. cit.). There the court had decided that in the case of HMPs the Home Secretary must be £exible in the exercise of his tariff-setting powers, to take account of the wel- fare of the young person and the considerable change that takes place in the move from boyhood to manhood. Despite the inroads into the discretionarypower the Home Secretary wielded, the fundamentals of mandatory life sen- tence managementötariff-setting and decision on releaseöremained wholly with the executive. In May 1997 the Labour Party was elected to power with a huge majority. One of the platforms on which they stood was effectively a continuation of Michael Howard's populist punitive policies. Certainly when it came to the response to the judgment in Pierson, Jack Straw, the new Home Secretary, was not prepared to give very much. He held on to the principle that the first tariff set for an MLP was an `initial' view, and emphasized that a tariff may be altered upwards or downwards at a later date. There was, however, a slight shift in emphasis. First, there was a clearer divide between tariff-setting and release on licence. The first would be done by reference only to retribution and deterrence, the latter by reference to risk and the ``need to maintain public confidence in the system of criminal justice'' (10 November 1997, Hansard (HC Debates) cols 419^420: written answer). Second, tariffs, once set, would only be altered in `exceptional circumstances' and this would include the possibility of a reduction because of `exceptional progress' by the prisoner. This was something that Michael Howard was not prepared to concede. Myra Hindley's Case: the Judicial Review Challenges As we have seen, Myra Hindley was sentenced to life when the concept of a properly managed, legally structured life sentence was in its infancy. The original trial judge made no formal recommendation as to tariff. He did however write to the Home Secretary after passing sentence, and the original letter was reproduced in the judgment of Hindley's first judicial review chal- lenge, R v. SSHD ex parte Hindley (op. cit.). This document is remarkable for its ambiguity. Thus, he initially states that there was no recommendation made ``[i]n passing sentence because the only possible one would have been at that stage that neither of them would have been set free again'' (p. 760). Yet he follows this with remarks about Hindley not being beyond redemption, and then measures her incarceration against Brady's: I hope Brady will not be released in any foreseeable future . . . and that Hindley (apart from some dramatic conversion) will be kept in prison for a very long time . . . I do not claim sufficient prophetic insight to venture to suggest any term of years (ibid.). Apart from the clear indication that the trial judge was thinking at least along the lines of eventual release, one other matter to re£ect on when exam- ining this letter is Hindley's degree of culpability, a focus point for her cam- paigners. Thus, Fenton Atkinson's letter remarks on the possibility of Hindley's redemption once she is ``removed from his in£uence'', an in£uence which has ``deeply corrupted'' her. This was also the basis on which the Crown presentedthe case at trial. As Bingham LCJ puts it: ``Brady was the initiator of these crimes, and the actual killer; the applicant was cast as his willing accomplice, corrupted and dominated by him''. Because of the early, haphazard management of mandatory life sentences and the secrecy that surrounded it Hindley knew nothing of her tariff until December 1994. She was then informed that in July 1990 a decision was made to detain her for life. She was also told that in January 1985 a decision to set her tariff `initially' at 30 years had been taken. This information became known to her lawyers only as a result of the £ood of documents that were released under the new disclosure rules follow- ing Doody. In December 1994 the incumbent Home Secretary, Michael Howard, gave de facto recognition to the `whole life tariff' (Hansard (H.C.) Debates: written answers, cols 234^235). He made it clear that although he would review the detention of such prisoners after 25 years, with a view to considering whether to convert it to a determinate period, the only consideration was whether the requirements of retribution and deterrence had been met. This meant of course that any progress a prisoner would make was not a consideration. Re£ecting on Fenton Atkinson J's re- marks about `redemption' it is easy to see how Hindley was disadvantaged by this policy. As a result of an invitation to do so from Michael Howard, lawyers for Hindley made representations as to why she should be given a determinate tariff. His response in February 1997 was to confirm the whole life tariff, a decision that formed the basis of the judicial review challenge. This focused on two issues, the lawfulness of the whole life tariff itself and the refusal to take into account factors other than retribution and deterrence in considering a tariff conversion from whole life to a determinate period. In the court of first instance in December 1997 the application was successful on the second point and failed on the first. Events had however overtaken the legal process. As we saw above (p. 112) there was a new incumbent Home Secretary, Jack Straw, who had announced a change in policy following Pierson: So far as the potential for a reduction in tariff is concerned, I shall be open to the possibility that, in exceptional circumstances, including for example exceptional progress by the prisoner whilst in custody, a review and reduction of the tariff may be appropriate (op. cit.). The court then found that Michael Howard's policy on this point had been unlawful, but that had been effectively remedied by Straw's new policy. Nearly a year later the Court of Appeal considered that matter again. Once again it was found that a whole life tariff was not unlawful. It is clear from reading the judgment that the case is one that the senior judiciary found deeply troubling. First, the court made it clear that their brief extended nofurther than the legality of the decision-making process. As Lord Woolf MR put it:It is not part of our function to decide whether the applicant should be released from prison, or whether she should remain in prison; or, if she is to remain in prison, to decide how long she should remain in prison (p. 1258). This was of course a given, in doctrinal terms at least, as this was a judicial review challenge. It is significant, however, that Woolf felt it necessary to point this out. Woolf was also concerned about the whole life tariff, finding it conceptually dubious. His solution was to re-cast it as a `non-life tariff', a species of indeterminate sentence that, whilst an exception to the normal pol- icy for MLPs, is not by virtue of its exceptional nature unlawful. There were further problems for the Court of Appeal; in both the case of Venables and Pierson the House of Lords had indicated, albeit in a confusing manner, that the fixing of an MLPs tariff was the exercising of a function that was analogous to sentencing. Furthermore, the Lords ruled that there was no general power vested in the Home Secretary to increase a tariff once lawfully fixed and communicated to the prisoner. However, this was to be seen purely in administrative law termsöin other words the test would be restricted to whether or not there was any abuse of process or unfairness in the procedure. The difficulty for Myra Hindley (and the courts) was that there had been a tariff, fixed at 30 years. This, however, was fixed in January 1985, before pris- oners had access to such information. Furthermore the Home Secretary was apparently, only drawing a `provisional conclusion' in deciding on this figure. The provisional nature of the tariff and the fact that it had not been commu- nicated to Hindley resulted in her appeal failing. The case finally reached the House of Lords in February 2000, with judg- ment given on 30 March 2000 (R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex parte Hindley, TheTimes: 31March 2000). The appeal focused on two issues: the general point of the unlawfulness of whole life tariffs, and the specific point of the unlawfulness of the treatment of Hindley. The court chose once again to see the issue as simply one of administrative law doctrine, finding nothing unlawful either in the concept of a whole life tariff, nor in its use in this case. Asking the Jurisprudential Question At the heart of the Myra Hindley case lies a question that is fundamental to jurisprudence. In outlining how the city states of Ancient Greece were formed, David Cohen emphasizes the importance of the nascent legal institutions: Henceforth, citizens may not pursue private vengeance for wrongs done to them, but must bring their case before the representatives ofthe polis and submit to its judgment. The principle of blood vengeance . . . is transformed and incorporated within the new framework of civic institutions where it will help to preserve Athens from enemies within and without. Legal process triumphs over private violence (Cohen 1987: 3). For constitutional lawyers the rule of law is fundamental. We argue that the triumph of legal process over private vengeance is the purest representation of the rule of law, as it was originally formulatedöas the rule of law, not men. In this form it implies a dispassion that transcends the thirst for blood that follows horrendous crimes. The Hindley case also starkly illustrates the wider, and problematic, rela- tionship between the executive and the judiciary, an issue the judiciary have shown themselves to be well aware of in cases involving life sentence prison- ers. As just one example, the doctrine of the separation of powers, notwith- standing its dubious position in the U.K.'s constitutional arrangement, was used by Lord Steyn in the Venables case to justify his findings: as he puts it, because the Home Secretary is carrying out a judicial function, which is ``[c]ontrary to the constitutional principle of the separation of powers'' he must ``[n]ot act contrary to the fundamental principles governing the admin- istration of justice'' (op. cit.: p. 147). As every first-year law student knows, Dicey (1968) saw the rule of law as one of the twin peaks of our constitution, along with Parliamentary supre- macy. As he put it: By every path we come round to the same conclusion, that Parliamentary sovereignty has favoured the rule of law, and that supremacy of the law of the land both calls forth the exertion of parliamentary sovereignty, and leads to it being exercised in a spirit of legality (p. 414). Extending our argument about the rule of law then, we contend that constraining capriciousness is fundamental to ensuring that such sovereignty, in this case represented as executive discretion, is ``exercised in the spirit of legality''. The further difficulty which the Hindley case encapsulates is that with life sentence prisoners, and MLPs in particular, we are, whether we acknowl- edge it or not, dealing with punishment. Thus, the lawyers for Hindley, as in Pierson's earlier cases, tried to argue that it is fundamental to the com- mon law that punishment should not be enhanced retrospectively, that the judiciary should accept as a principle the concept of ``non-aggrava- tion of penalties''. This they were not willing to do, preferring to stay within the parameters of public law doctrine, a re£ection perhaps of a general desire not to stray into the territory of executive discretion. This will undoubtedly remain so, as long as judicial review remains the only means bywhich MLPs can challenge the tariff-setting exercise. As Lord Mustill put it in Doody: I think it is quite impossible for the courts to introduce a fundamental change to the relationship between the convicted murderer and the state, through the medium of judicial review (p. 105). Conclusion and Comparisons It is an axiom of our legal system that `hard cases make bad law'. We argue that not only is this correct, but also that we can extend this to take account of `hard' as meaning rock-like, impenetrable. Certainly this is an apt meta- phor for the Hindley case, as despite all the advances in judicializing the life sentence process, when the courts butt up against this case there is no further movement. Regardless of the rhetoric, the courts know that the real issue is not before them. This was acknowledged in a refreshingly candid way by Bingham LCJ in the Divisional Court. This application is of great importance to the applicant as also to those who continue to suffer from her crimes. But I part from the case uneasily conscious that the issues which may really underlie the case are not before us. There is room for serious debate whether the task of determining how long convicted murderers should serve in prison as punishment for their crimes should be undertaken by the judiciary (as in the case of discretion- ary life prisoners) or, as now, by the executive. That is, in large measure, a political and constitutional question. It is not a question for decision by this court. The applicant clearly feels that she is held hostage to public opinion, condemned to pass the rest of her life in prison, although no longer judged a danger to anyone, because of her notoriety and the public obloquy which would fall on any Home Secretary who ordered her release (p. 779). A further problem with Hindley's case is also illustrated by this passage; Bingham is quite correct to say that any Home Secretary would suffer public obloquy for releasing Hindley, although `committing political suicide' would perhaps be more apt. This has meant, we suggest, that the position of all MLPs, some 3000, will remain the same, as any Government that changed its stance on MLPs would automatically be pilloried as those who `let Myra Hindley out of prison' [6]. When one contrasts the position of MLPs with DLPs, moreover, a great irony is apparent. As was pointed out in the cited parliamentary debate in the House of Lords, MLPs differ greatly in terms of the nature of their crime, and some could never be said to be terribly danger- ous (op. cit. cols 283^304). With the case of mercy killers, indeed, one could argue that they would even be viewed as sympathetic characters. The same could not be said of DLPs who usually have committed extremely nasty crimes. Yet the current position means that all murderers are treated the same, and are subject to a quotient of punishment that is ultimatelypolitically-determined.With the recent total judicializing of the HMP process moreover (above p. 3) the final block to equalizing all life sentences has been removed, as the mandatory life sentence is now unique in this country in hav- ing executive involvement. It appears that there is no hope from Europe either; despite the interven- tion of the European Court of Human Rights on behalf of DLPs (Thynne v. U.K. op. cit.) and HMPs (Singh v. U.K. (1996) 1 BHRC 119:Tv. U.K.:Vv. U.K. op. cit.) they have shown themselves unwilling to similarly intervene on behalf of MLPs. In Wynne v. U.K. ([1997] 19 EHRR 333) a clear distinction between DLPs and MLPs was drawn by the court. For them, the two sentences are not to be viewed as the same, as they serve different purposes, and are informed by different philosophies [7]. Essentially they saw the discretionary life sen- tence as a unique punitive measure tailored to the characteristics of the offen- der, whereas the mandatory life sentence was fixed by law as a re£ection of the peculiar opprobrium with which our society views the murderer. Yet an examination of Western European legal systems reveals not a single jurisdic- tion that has an equivalent arbitrarily assigned tariff for the life sentence (McGeorge 1990). Even Russia, in its abolishing the death penalty as part of its effort to join the Council of Europe has decided on constructing its new life sentence with a fixed 25-year penal period (Moscow Center for Prison Reform 1998). In an earlier article (Schone 1999) we called for more international aca- demic research into punishment from a prison law perspective, as this enables a clearer `reading' of penal policy. We echo this with our analysis of the cur- rent structure of the mandatory life sentence. Such research as there is that deals with the topic tends to do so obliquely, usually by reference to the sen- tencing of violent offenders (Henham 1993; Fitzgerald 1995). One of the diffi- culties is that as an object of study, life sentence structures is the natural preserve of criminal justice, the blending of criminology and law. As a subject it falls between public law, criminal law, and the half-discipline sentencing law, yet not being wholly subsumed under any of these headings the indivi- duals who seek the law's protection lack full juridical guard. This is particu- larly why more international work is needed, to bolster the argument that MLPs in the U.K. are in a legally unfortunate and morally unsustainable position. In summary, as lawyers challenged the extent of executive discretion in re- lation to life sentence prisoners here and in Europe there was a divergence between discretionary and mandatory sentences, with DLPs accumulating a panoply of positive rights in what became an entirely judicial process. MLPs by contrast, although they gained some rights, still have their tariffs deter- mined by the executive. Myra Hindley's case exemplifies the difficulties of law growing organically in the fashion that the law relating to life sentence prisoners has in this country, as whilst there is a murderer who has become an icon of evil through constant press damnation there is little chance ofaggressive judicial intervention. Furthermore, the Hindley case raises funda- mental issues about the rule of law and the nature of punishment in our so- ciety. In strict doctrinal terms the courts' decisions in Hindley may have been correct. The fact is that, dress it up as you may, the indication and expecta- tion at Hindley's sentencing and for at least 20 years afterwards was that she would eventually be released. It should make no difference that it was not communicated to her. Leaving aside the public opinion point, she is essen- tially being detained as a result of a historical accident, for there is no doubt that had the 30-year `provisional' tariff been communicated to her in 1985 things would have been different, notwithstanding her 1987 confession of further murders. We argue further that the setting of a tariff is a sentencing exercise, despite the protestations of some members of the judiciary. It is also not enough to argue, as LordWoolf does rather weakly, that the courts' deci- sion will have no effect on Hindley's eventual release date. It is clear that the two killers of Jamie Bulger will eventually be released, particularly now as their tariff is to be set by the Lord Chief Justice [8]. The complete judicializa- tion of the HMP sentence is a demonstration of the dramatic impact that con- demnatory comment from the judiciary can have upon the executive. Following Venables, HMPs no longer have their tariffs determined by those whose livelihood depends upon the public's view. This is, we argue, entirely as it should be, for it removes by one step the punishing of the individual from those who wish to wreak vengeance. If Venables demonstrates only one thing it is that hard cases do not necessarily make bad law. There is no reason why there cannot be a system with one entirely judicialized life sentence, whether mandatory or discretionary at point of imposition. In an editorial comment in the Criminal Law Review (1996, p. 609), as Pierson and Venables were wending their way through the courts, the position of the Home Secretary vis a(c) vis MLPs was referred to as `Canute-like'. This may have been an apt metaphor at the time, but as the Hindley case has progressed the `line in the sand' is perhaps more fitting, as one detects a sense amongst the senior judiciary of `this far and no further'. Myra Hindley's case is the point at which this line has been drawn, we suggest. There is a fundamental unfairness to her case as she has been effec- tively re-sentenced, and, as Hobhouse L.J. pointed out, when the Venables case was heard in the Court of Appeal ``The sentence is passed having regard to the state of affairs existing at the time sentence is passed'' (1997 1 All ER 327^ 355). The concept of a tariff barely existed at the time Hindley was sentenced, and as we have seen Lord Woolf was profoundly uncomfortable with the notion of a `whole life tariff', a penal construct that post-dated Hindley's sen- tencing by over two decades. There is a wider concern however. AsTRS Allan (1999), a leading theorist of the rule of law points out: At the core of the liberal ideal of a government of laws, and not of men, is the conviction that the state's interference with the liberty or property ofindividuals must be regulated by general laws, whose purpose are direc- ted to some aspect of the common good and are not designed specifically to affect the circumstances of particular, identifiable persons (p. 222). We could hardly have a more startling representation then of the undermin- ing of the rule of law than a penal policy that is fixed at a certain point as a consequence of one individual case. Furthermore, although there is vague authority in English Law for the notion that public opinion has a place in sentencing (R v. Sargeant [1974] 60 Cr.App.R. 74) [9] it is unjust and venturing on the obscene to equate tabloid press-engendered opinion with the `common good'. This was stated in the clearest terms by Lord Steyn in Venables: Plainly a sentencing judge must ignore a newspaper campaign designed to encourage him to increase a particular sentence. It would be an abdica- tion of the rule of law for a judge to take into account such matters. The same reasoning must apply to the Home Secretary when he is exercising a sentencing function (op. cit. p. 147). With the Hindley case, the hardest of hard cases, there is an abdication of the rule of law. The announcement that henceforth all HMPs will have their tar- iff decided by the judiciary, notwithstanding its impact upon the case of the Bulger killers, passed without major incident, and was even met with ap- proval in some quarters [10]. Following this there is now no reason why the government could not announce that MLPs should likewise have their tariffs decided by the judiciary. Should they do so, they would not only finally recti- fy an anomaly in our legal system that is the result of nothing more than a historical accident, but would, more importantly, reassert the importance of the rule of law in our constitution. Notes 1 p. 114 of the judgment. Referring to the media campaign to keep the killers of James Bulger in prison for life, he states ``Little credit can be given to favourable responses to a campaign that the two applicants should rot `in jail' for the rest of their lives, especially when it is borne in mind that those who responded may well have been unaware that, even after the penal element in their sentences had been served, their release would not be automatic. . .''. 2 As this paper is concerned with the punishment aspect of the life sentence we shall not be examining the recall procedure. In terms of this procedure there is no real difference between the various types of life sentence. See Livingstone & Owen (1999: ch. 13, 14). 3 Some confusion may arise here. The House of Lords has two constitutional func- tions. It is the upper chamber of the United Kingdom's Parliament, and is also the highest court in the land. It should be clear from the context to which we are referring.4 cf.http://www.mori.com/polls/1997/hindley.htm. The upshot of the poll was that two-thirds disagreed with the view that they should respect the Home Secre- tary's decision if he decided to release her. 5 Even the most cursory of searches throws up a series of articles in the British press that re£ect this. In particular there was considerable concern expressed about the criminal justice system. Two cases in particular seemed to inspire adverse commentary. One was the dropping of charges against a couple suspected of cruetly against their child, who later died. They had both remained silent in the face of police questioning. See ``Child's death exposes legal £aw'' (The Guardian: 16 January 1993). In July of that year Joseph Elliott was acquitted of the murder of Robert Osborne. Osborne was stabbed by Elliott when he confronted him for committing criminal damage, and Elliott successfully pleaded self-defence at his trial. See ``Vigilante's stabbing prompts self-defence study'' (The Guardian: 15 July 1993). There were also wider concerns expressed about a perceived increase in vigilantism and `DIY justice' (see the article by Ian McKenzie, a former police officer in The Guardian on the same day). In addition cases like that of Beverley Allitt, convicted in May 1993 of the murder of children in her care, caused considerable concern at the state of statutory provisions for the supervision of the mentally ill. See ``Mentally ill people kill 32 in a year, study finds'' (The Independent: 14 August 1993). 6 This is illustrated by remarks made by Lord Longford in the cited debate in the House of Lords: ``I am not surprised that people in this house and elsewhere say to me, `I agree with you, my dear chap. Of course after all these years she ought to come out. But you can't imagine any Home Secretary having the guts to let her out, can you? Think what would happen to him. Think what the tabloids would do to him.' This is what many people say to me about tabloid pressure'' (op. cit. col 723). 7 Wynne is still good law, despite the court in Strasbourg finding that the executi- ve's setting of the tariff in HMP cases to be a breach of Article 51 and 54.Tv. U.K.: R V. v. U.K. (above p. 3). 8 In his statement to the House of Commons the Home Secretary stated that the tariff in the particular case of Robert Thompson and Jon Venables would be referred to the Lord Chief Justice for determination. 9 In this case Lawton LJ remarked, whilst outlining the principles that underlie sentencing ``There is, however, another aspect of retribution which is frequently overlooked: it is that society, through the courts, must show its abhorrence of particular types of crimes, and the only way in which the courts can show this is by the sentences they pass. The courts do not have to re£ect public opinion. On the other hand the courts must not disregard it. Perhaps the main duty of the court is to lead public opinion'' (p. 77). 10 See ``Mr Straw, it's time to listen to the courts'' (TheTimes: 11 April 2000). References Allan, T.R.S. (1999) The rule of law as the rule of reason: consent and constitutional- ism. Law Quarterly Review 115, 221^224.Ashworth, A. & Hough, M. (1996) Sentencing and the climate of opinion. Criminal Law review, 776^787. Blom-Cooper, L. & Morris, T. (1996) The penalty for murder: a myth exploded. Criminal Law Review, 707^717. Bottoms, A. (1995) The philosophy and politics of punishment and sentencing. In The Politics of Sentencing Reform, Clarkson, C. & Morgan, R. (Eds), Clarendon: Oxford. Coker, J.B. & Martin, J.P. (1985) LicencedTo Live. Blackwell: Oxford. Cohen, D. (1987) Law, Violence, and Community in Classical Athens. Cambridge UP: Cambridge. Dicey, A. (1968) Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution (10th edn). Macmil- lan: London. Fitzgerald, E. (1995) The Criminal Justice Act 1991: preventative detention of the dan- gerous offender. European Human Rights Law Review, 39^48. Henham, R. (1993) The European context of sentencing violent offenders. International Journal of the Sociology of Law 21, 265^280. Livingstone, S. & Owen, T. (1999) Prison Law:Text and Materials (2nd edn). Oxford UP: Oxford. McGeorge, N. (1990) A Fair Deal for Lifers. Quaker Council for European Affairs: Brussels. Moscow Center for Prison Reform (1998) Human Beings and Prison. Information and materials published in conjunction with the Ford Foundation: Moscow. Ritchie, J. (1991) Myra Hindley: Inside the Mind of a Murderess. Grafton: London. Schone, J.M. (1999) Legacy of a con£ict: special secure units, penal policy, and the law International Journal of the Sociology of Law 27, 207^228. Wilson, C.R.M. (1993) `Going to Europe': prisoners' rights and the effectiveness of Eur- opean Standards. International Journal of the Sociology of Law 21, 245^264.NEW_ARTICLE'Our Scapegoat': An Exploration of Media Representations of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West The purpose of the article is to explore Girard's (1986) concept of the scapegoat, from a feminist perspective, by applying it to media representations of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West. First, Girard's theoretical approach to the concept of the scapegoat is outlined; secondly, the article describes some of the theoretical issues which surround female serial killers; this includes an analysis of media representations of women, especially if they are criminal; thirdly, the academic literature on media representations of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West is reviewed; fourthly, the work of Girard (1986) is applied to the media representations of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West; fifthly, Noddings (1989) is used to demonstrate how cultural associations between women and evil, the resulting hatred of female bodies and, by implication, their sexuality, underpin the scapegoating of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West. In conclusion, the article further reflects on the material discussed. This article arises out of (a) a long-standing Quaker concern for those engaged in the criminal justice system (see Newell 2000; Arriens 2002; Hoyle et al. 2002), (b) the apparent inability of the Christian community at large to participate in and challenge media discourse(s) on crime and punishment, and (c) my curiosity in exploring why Myra Hindley and Rosemary West appear to have borne the burden of the responsibility for the crimes for which they were found guilty; their male partners in crime seem to have been largely absolved of their respective roles in the killing process. Underpinning this discussion is an acknowledgment that the concept of retribution is rooted in Judeo-Christian attitudes towards crime and punishment. Historically this has had a significant determining influence on the development of the criminal justice system and penal policy in Britain (Gorringe 1996). Jones (2002) provides us with a useful evaluation of this legacy and urges Christians with a commitment to social justice to incorporate the criminal justice system into their vision. In addition, many Christian denominations, have, both in the past and in the present, responded creatively to the challenges posed by engaging with all those involved with the criminal justice system (Jones and Sedgwick 2002). This is work which needs to be more widely known and could usefully ir\form Christian theology and engagement with public discourse(s) on crime and punishment. This leads us to explore the concept of the scapegoat. Girard (1986:12) explores the concept of the scapegoat through differing aspects of collective persecution. The idea of collective persecution is defined as acts of violence dedicated directly at a particular group by a rabble of murderers. The example he gives is the persecution of the Jews during the Black Death. This is distinguished from the collective resonance of persecution; this involves acts of violence, such as witchhunts, which are legal in form, but are fuelled by the extremes of public opinion. However, the distinction between collective persecution and a collective resonance of persecution is not clear-cut. In the UK, current examples of both collective persecution and the collective resonance of persecution include some public treatment of asylum-seekers, serial killers and paedophiles. Girard (1986) suggests that there are three stereotypes that contribute to the overall stereotype of persecution. These are (1) the stereotype of crisis, (2) the stereotype of accusation, and (3) the stereotype of victims. In describing the stereotype of crisis Girard (1986) suggests that this is characterized by institutional collapse resulting in the negation of hierarchical and functional differences between people and the development of a cultural sameness that is both dull and hideous. In societies that are not in crisis the impression of difference can be differentiated, diversity welcomed and reciprocal elements are concealed by the culture and the nature of the exchange. In situations where societies are breaking down there is a speeding up of the tempo of positive exchanges; these only occur when absolutely necessary. Negative exchanges also increase and become more visible as insults, blows, vengeance and neurotic symptoms. Negative reciprocity brings people into opposition with one another, increases the uniformity of their behaviour and is responsible for the prevalence of cultural similarity. This lack of differentiation is both actual, in terms of human relationships, and mythic, in the sense that cultural uniformity has been projected on to the whole universe. The processes of uniformity have been created through reciprocity and the experience of social crisis appears to be little affected by the diversity of their causes (Girard 1986:13-14). In the stereotype of accusation the inereasing obscurity of culture leads men [sic] to feel diseoncerted by the enormity of the disaster, but not to explore the underlying eauses; the idea that they might affeet the eauses by learning more about them remains minimal. There is a tendency to explain the eultural crisis in moral or soeial terms. However, people generally blame soeiety as a whole or those who apparently seem partieularly harmful. The suspects are accused of a particular category of crimes (Girard 1986:14). In terms of collective persecution, particular accusations are characteristic because their very mention makes modern observers suspect that violence is in the air. First, there are those violent crimes against those whom it is criminal to attack. These include particular individuals such as a king, a father or other representation of the supreme patriarch and those who are weakest and most defenceless in society. Secondly, there are sexual crimes. These frequently contravene the strictest social taboos in the culture concerned. Thirdly, there are religious crimes, for example the sacrilege of the host; this too, transgresses profound social taboos (Girard 1986:15). These crimes seem fundamental as they attack the foundation of the cultural order and embrace the family and the hierarchical differences which underpin the social sfructure. Ultimately the persecutors usually convince themselves that a small number of people or single individuals are exfremely harmful to society. The stereotypical allegation rationalizes and sustains this belief by apparently acting in the role of mediator. This apparently bridges the enormous gap between the (insignificant) individual and society as a whole (Girard 1986:15). The stereotype of victims refers to the crowd's choice of victims, which at times seems to be quite random. The crimes of which the victims are accused may be real, but the persecutors choose their victims because the group to which the victim is especially susceptible to persecution, rather than because of the crimes they have committed. Being a member of an ethnic or religious minority is an important feature of victimhood, since few societies do not subject these minorities to discrimination or persecution. In addition to cultural and religious factors there are also purely physical criteria such as sickness, madness, genetic deformities, physical disability or accidental injury. In fact, from a linguistic perspective, the language associated with disability is sometimes used to further victimize marginalized people or groups (Girard 1986:18). Although the groups already described may be regarded as marginal outsiders, the rich and powerful are also victimized. Girard (1986: 19) maintains that, statistically, the rich and powerful are more at risk from persecution than any other group. Extremes, not only of poverty and wealth, but vice and virtue, beauty and ugliness, and the strength of the most powerful, become weaknesses in the face of the crowd. In addition, the boundary between rational discrimination and arbitrary persecution is difficult to trace. At heart, persecution is based on difference. Each time direct or indirect violence is reported we need to ask whether it includes any or all of the following: a description of the social and cultural disorder that leads to a loss of difference (the stereotype of crisis), fundamental crimes which challenge the social, cultural or political order (the stereotype of accusation) and/or whether the suggested authors of the crime themselves suggest victimhood, or an absence of difference (the stereotype of victims). The use of two or more stereotypes within a docimient indicates persecution. Their existence convinces us that: (1) the acts of violence are real; (2) the crisis is real; (3) the victims are chosen, not for the crimes that they are accused of, but for the signs that they bear, for everything that suggests their guilty relationship, and (4) the import of the operation is to lay the responsibility for the crisis on the victims and to exert an influence on it by destroying these victims or at least by banishing then from the communities they 'pollute' (Girard 1986: 24). This leads us to examine some of the theoretical issues involved in exploring media representations of female serial killers. In her discussion on the female serial killers, Skrapec (1993: 242) suggests that the criminal justice system, criminological researchers and the media view aggressive criminality as essentially masculine in origin. Murder is predominantly a male crime with women being seen as the exception rather than the rule. That women have long been, and continue to be, multiple murderers, profoundly challenges deeply held assumptions about women and their capacity to nurture others. In referring to the United States, Skrapec (1993:243) suggests that between 12 per cent and 17 per cent of homicides are committed by women. For a similar discussion in the UK context see Dobash et al. (1995). Typically, women who kill are cast as 'black widows' (women who kill their husbands, children or other relatives), or as 'angels of death' or 'mercy' killers (women who kill patients in their care); like female multiple murderers they have not been examined as a group except in the most notable of cases. Nor has any comparative work been undertaken between female and male murderers. Skrapec (1993: 244) cautions against making easy assumptions about differences between male and female murderers and suggests that the critical distinction between the two groups lies in the modus operandi of the activity, not in the underlying motives. In terms of the serial murderer, definitions remain problematic. For Skrapec (1993: 245), a serial murderer is someone who kills at least three people over a period of time; the killer may or may not have had previous knowledge of the victim. The inclusion of a sexual component to the definition of serial murder is problematic for some authors, though Kelleher and Kelleher (1998) view the sexual predator as being one feature of their classification of female serial murderers. For some serial murderers sexual violation and the killing process are intimately connected. For others, sexual violation may not be an intimate part of the murder, but the circumstance of the killing may be highly charged and souvenirs from the body or the scene may be kept for later masturbatory fantasies. The view that Cameron and Frazer (1987) take-that sexual or lust killing is solely a male phenomenon-is rejected by Skrapec (1993); she provides many female examples, both current and historical, from the US and Europe. Cameron (1996) suggests that the media viewed both Myra Hindley and Rosemary West as serial killers. Kelleher and Kelleher (1998:10) suggest that female serial murderers fall into two broad categories: those who comnut crimes alone and those who do so in partnership with one or more perpetrators. Female serial killers who are part of a team act in very different ways to those who act alone. There are few similarities between those perpetrators who act alone and the criminal who works in conjunction with someone else, especially if her partner is a male sexual predator. This broad categorization into those who kill with and those who murder without a partner cannot address questions of motivation. In stressing the ideological importance of the media Naylor (1995: 79) quotes from Chibnall thus: the power of newspaper interpretation lies in their ability to make events intelligible at a mundane, 'commonsense' level, to provide a guide for practical activity and to alleviate the need for further investigation and consideration. The self confident and assertive style in which the interpretations are communicated complements their general claim to represent the opinions of all right-minded people and encourages their ready acceptance as self-evident and 'obvious'... This commonsense mode of understanding trades off myths and stereotypes which provide simple, comfortable, ready-made pictures and explanations of things (Chibnall 1977: 44). Naylor (1995: 81) suggests that the following typology may be developed from media coverage of women's crime. 1. Madonna/whore 2. Sexual passion/love as an 'excuse' for crime 3. Reproduction and madness 4. The figure of evil-the witch-the monster 5. The criminal woman as 'not woman' 6. The female as devious and manipulative. While recognizing that there is not necessarily a neat 'fit' between this typology and individual women criminals, Naylor (1995: 84) proposes that Myra Hindley could be placed in both the sexual passion/love category and the figure of evil-the witch-the monster. Placing Rosemary West in this typology is more problematic; one of the threads in her image seems to be that of the monster. In terms of her sexuality, there seem to be interesting resonances with the Madorma/whore imagery. There also appears to be a thread of the criminal woman as 'not woman' in her representation. She does not, however, have the same iconic status as Myra Hindley, who remains fixed in the public imagination as the feminine face of evil. This leads us to explore the media representations of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West in greater detail. Birch (1993) suggests that the police photograph of Myra Hindley, taken in 1965 at the time of the Moors Murders, depicting her with bleach-blonde hair, hooded eyes and staring blankly from the page, has become synonymous with the idea of feminine evil. Like the image of Medusa, this photograph has acquired the attribute of myth, the stony gaze of Britain's longest-serving woman prisoner, striking terror, mingled with fascination, in those who look upon it. At once atavistic - drawing its power from potent symbols of wicked women from the Medusa to seventeenth century witches-and portentous-what kinds of acts might women be capable of?-that image has become symbolic of the threat of femininity unleashed from its traditional bonds of goodness, tenderness, and nurturance. It strikes at the heart of our fears about unruly women, about criminality and about the way gender is constructed (Birch 1993: 32). Since 1965 Myra Hindley's image has continued to have a bizarre grip on the public imagination and has become detached from the subject, the woman who committed those crimes all those years ago. The symbolic weight she bears exceeds the crimes that she and Ian Brady committed at a particular time and in a specific place all those years ago. One of the reasons Birch (1993: 33) suggests that makes this case unique is the fact of her gender; the assumption that it is worse for a woman to be involved in killing children than it is for a man. Myra Hindley's reputation is endemic in her femininity, and this is significant for all women. Her image has been used to communicate the horror of femininity, distorted from its 'natural' course; this does not mean that the process is intentional or conspiratorial, though in some cases it may be. Unconsciously, her image has come to represent some of our most commonsense and paradoxical views of women. On the one hand to be a woman is to be passive and naive (Myra Hindley was the dupe of Ian Brady). On the other, her agency can only be explained by her cunning and her taintedness (she is imbued with evil, deviousness and guile). Myra Hindley's acts deserve our moral repugnance but her image sits uneasily somewhere between the two poles (Birch 1993: 35). M5n-a Hindley has become the arch villain and her attempts to gain her freedom have been cited as evidence for her lack of real penitence and of her 'evil' nature. In this context, the relationship between femininity and 'evil' implies guile, manipulation and deceit. The source of this evil has never been defined. If it is natural, Myra Hindley cannot be blamed for her crimes; if it is acquired, then we need to explore its origins and sotirce. If evU is imposed from outside, as Christian thinking would have it, Myra Hindley stops being a human being, or even a woman at all (Birch 1993: 49). In reflecting on that photograph of Myra Hindley, we need to be reminded of the gap between what we see and what we know, since the photograph has often sat alongside articles which unintentionally interrogate its meaning-mad or bad? devil or dupe? In doing so, an abyss is created between the belief that femininity guarantees idealism, nurtiarance and nature, and its opposites: violence, dissoluteness and nihilism. Its purpose is to distance the onlooker from the 'monster' it porti-ays, at the same time reminding us of our own capacity for 'evil'. It is perhaps one reason why we find the gaze of a single, childless, sexually active woman who kills children so distiirbing. It is ultimate fury against and rebuttal of the much vaunted maternal instinct and cuts through the boimdary of sexual difference (Birch 1993: 53). Myra Hindley's media presence was reinvigorated when her photograph was given a reworking in the 'Sensation' exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1997. Here Marcus Harvey used a plaster cast of a child's hand to make an enlarged picture of the police mug shot of Myra Hindley. Kent (1997:17) suggests that this recreation gained its mesmeric ferocity through its juxtaposition of opposites - evil and innocence, small and large, touch and vision, the immediate and the mythic. Walker (1998) suggests the pictiire of Myra Hindley in the 'Sensation' exhibition acts as three kinds of sign-index, icon and symbol. In his semiotic analysis. Walker (1998) suggests that Harvey's painting can be understood as a supersign, embodying indexical, iconic and symbolic meanings. Here, the indexical sign is associated with the size of the painting (11 ft by 9 ft) and the way in which, in creating such a big pictiire, the artist endowed it with a quality associated with public memorials. These are usually associated with heroes and heroines, not criminals. In terms of the picture's iconic nature, the units of mark in the black and white acrylic paint are made by the plaster cast of the palm of a child's open hand, not that of a paintbrush. The handprints are an example of an indexical sign, since they span the history of art from cave painting to the present day; they may also be regarded as iconic since they resemble the shape of hands. In this picture therefore, small indexical/iconic signs are used as the building blocks of a larger, different iconic sign. The handprints are poignant because they represent all the children murdered by Hindley and Brady. The painting is symbolic in the sense that Myra Hindley's face is considered as a sign of evil (Walker 1998: 56-57). What is interesting about Kent's (1997) and Walker's (1998) contribution, is that the visual images in the art world seem to be treated in a significantly different way to those in news media. Although, from an historical perspective, the world of art and the news media may on the surface have had little in common, postmodernism and the increasing commodification of all kinds of artistic artefacts has changed this. The reason is that particular visual images, whatever their provenance, are increasingly spread, reused and reworked across a range of media forms. From this discussion, there are profound questions to be asked about the standards by which femininity is judged and the ways in which female serial killers unsettle our assumptions about women. In this context we can see how the logic of opposite extremes and the ideological norms of female behaviour combine to refuse her any agency, to make her the 'innocent victim' of a psychopathic megalomania or to cast her as essentially wicked. The mythology of Myra Hindley demonstrates that we do not have an adequate language for female killing and this case disrupts the terms in which gender is held in place (Birch 1993: 61). In discussing the crimes of Fred and Rosemary West and Rosemary's subsequent trial Wykes (1998: 233-34) suggests that sex and violence constitute a good media story. The media industry is characterized as a mature industry where male norms have prevailed for more than 200 years. The maleness of the occupation in terms of its history, ideology and working practices embeds it in patriarchy, where masculine power depends mainly on female passivity, family and marriage. In the case of the Wests, where conventional gender norms are distorted out of all proportion, the requirement to report accurately may lead to a conflict between the needs of commerce and the needs of patriarchy. The media hype over the case was symptomatic of a broader political agenda, which sought to highlight and extol traditional conservative family and gender relationships even though the Wests' family and marriage were sites of aggression, sexual abuse and homicide. The police and other authorities had known the Wests for some time before February 1994, the month when the police began to dig the garden in 25 Cromwell Street, Gloucester. One explanation for the reluctance to interfere in the relationships of the Wests is the powerful mythology that surrounds the family in our culture and social organization. The current mythology is based on a cultural shift that occurred in the latter part of the nineteenth century that refashioned women as passive, maternal, married, monogamous and well-mannered and viewed husbanding and fatherhood as 'tamed' masculinity (Wykes 1998: 235). As it is currently constructed, the family was created as the site for adult sexuality and childhood innocence; children were to be educated by the state and subject to parental control; families were to be supervised by the medical profession.Under the cloak of traditionalism the notion of the family is not made problematic for either women or children. Instead of analysing the dangerousness of families, journalists tended to adopt a strategy of deflection. This moves all discussion of family problems into discourse where everything except the actual causes is discussed. Feminism, lesbianism, female promiscuity and psychosis take preference over any discussion of the dysfunctional or terminal problems associated with male heterosexual husbandry and fatherhood. Male heterosexuality and paternity, the most entrenched and oppressive of patriarchal sites, remain hardly defined. Criticism of masculine power and values was reduced, deflected or obliterated in the case of the Wests (Wykes 1998: 236-38). During the course of the trial the primary media discourses were legal and sexual. In blaming Fred and Rose, the media personalized the crimes, pathologized the causes and avoided any criticism of masculinity. This means that nowhere in the public discussion of these crimes was there any attempt to make problematic men's violence towards women and children. The guilty verdicts against Rose were pre-empted by newspaper headlines during the course of the trial; after the trial the tabloid newspapers ignored the legal arguments and focused solely on constructing Rose's sexuality as debauched. The tabloid accounts also almost exclusively reported the feminine in a disparaging way and supported a traditional set of gender norms and principles. Even the Wests' victims had negative cormotations - they were from children's homes, lesbians, nanaways, fostered or hitchhikers. There was almost nothing in the reportage about the male clientele who bought sex at Cromwell Street; newspapers reported that some were West Indian, but not that others were white, British and heterosexual. Most men involved in the press coverage were members of the legal profession. The effect of this was to put femininity on trial-tried by established icons of masculinity (Wykes 1998: 238). Although the accounts of both Fred and Rose were personalized, they were both qualitatively and quantitatively different. The story was not of male sexual violence, but of female inadequacy as a mother and perversion as a wife; it provides an example of what happens to incompetent girls who leave home too young and/or take lifts from strangers (Wykes 1989: 239-40). This view does not take account of the negative media images of Fred West as the story broke. One reason for the interrogative gap is that the case against the Wests challenges deeply held and culturally determined beliefs and symbols about home and family. For most of us home is a taken-for-granted concept about place, individuality, solitude and safety. During Rosemary West's trial 'home' became a 'house of horrors' in which family members, especially if they were female, and young women were imprisoned, used in sex scenes in Fred's snuff videos, tortured, raped, abused, killed and buried in unmarked graves (Wykes 1998: 241). We are also reminded, not only of the prevailing myths around the family, but also of our profovmd cultural resistance to fully recognizing the nature and extent of domestic violence and abuse, in all its forms. The failure to both theorize and analyse the cultural representations and values associated with gendered violence, led the cdminal justice system, in the case of the Wests, to fail to intervene effectively earlier. Over and over again heterosexual, paternal masculinity within the family is regarded as unproblematic, even when there is evidence of the devastation caused across the generations. Male violence is safe behind closed doors; responsibility for male violence is projected on to female psychopathology or stranger danger; it is protected by the myth of home and family, sustained in language through organizations and popular culture (Wykes 1998: 242). According to Wykes (1998:241), Fred and Rose came from large families that in many respects appeared normal, though each had an allegedly overbearing father. As a couple, their public image reflected the conventional idea of British family life-heterosexual couple with a mortgage, children, industrious and sociable. Nothing about their adult lives has been suggested as being the origin of their sexual violence, incest and murder. It may be the case that either or both of them were sexually abused as children, but no one has suggested that as children they were familiar with abduction, torment or murder linked to sexuality. Nor do their backgrounds suggest an adult future of prostitution, pimping or procurement of the creation of pornographic video material. However, what was hardly discussed m the press was the potential criminal commerciality of the West enterprises. This view of the Wests is challenged by Bum (1998), who provides a fuller, darker picture, not only of the Wests' relationship but also, in part, describes the social milieu in which their relationship developed. In this account, although many questions remain unanswered, their activities seem to have a more plausible provenance than Wykes (1998) allows. In order to explore how a family could go so astray we need to take a critical view of family life; this is difficult in a political and social climate that is almost universally pro-family. In the controversy surrounding Fred and Rosemary West, it was the women who were largely critiqued, and by extension, their femininity, maternity and sexuality (Wykes 1998: 223-24). All those involved in the lives of Fred and Rosemary West, their families of origin and their customers appeared unaware of the terminal, life-denying patriarchy at the heart of 25 Cromwell Street. This blindness did not result from ignorance, but because masculine values are so much a part of the cultural hegemony that they appear natural; that to objectify them, to make them 'other', requires a conscious act of will. To place dominance under our analytic gaze is disturbing because it requires us to question our own subjectivity, the families in which we are constellated and the language of our community, both of which are embedded in masculine ideology. The masculine model of home and family remains self-perpetuating because it makes alternative models-lesbian, gay, single, communal-deviant (Wykes 1998: 244). Furthermore, masculine interests and values buttress journalistic ideology and practice so knowledge is power and power is patriarchal. Work on the discourses of representation and explanation offers some insights in the case of the Wests and suggestions for further work; however, primacy is often given to the production and exchange of meanings in a given situation, rather than to the contextualization of those processes within specific powerful cultural and economic locations (Wykes 1998: 245). Many questions about what happened at 25 Cromwell Street are likely to remain unanswered. Examples include: the Wests were known to sell sex-why were no prosecutions brought for the soliciting or possession of obscene material? Why were Fred's videos destroyed when an earlier assault case was dropped? Why did the nearby children's home have no record of the connection between some of its children and the Wests? (Wykes 1998: 245). It is not possible to see Rosemary West as a victim of the violent abuse of masculine and commercial power, but it is easy to see her as a scapegoat. This is the point made by Moore (1997) about Myra Hindley. In a rare commentary by a Christian, Moore (1997) outlines how Jesus, by his cross and resurrection, has freed human beings from the need to scapegoat; he also reminds Christians that Jesus was a victim in his earthly life and was scapegoated, even though he had done nothing wrong. Christians are required to delight in the criminal just as much as they do in Jesus. The dynamic tension between a desire to scapegoat and the demand to see the criminal as a victim is wonderfully portrayed at the end of the film Dead Man Walking. Moore (1997) reminds us that one dreadful sideeffect of Myra Hindley's evil is that it puts her beyond the reach of our compassion and locks us into a pattern of scapegoating that is beyond the love of Christ. This means that what may have happened to her in her years of captivity does not exist for us. Moore's (1997) comments are as relevant for Rosemary West as they are for Myra Hindley. In attempting to provide a feminist framework for understanding the crimes committed by Rosemary West, Cameron (1996-97) suggests that she may have experienced abuse as a child and have been subject to abuse from Fred. In her endeavour to account for the differences in responses by women and men to personal experience of abuse she suggests that: Women and men are not in the same position, even when both are suffering the most hideous abuse: for they live in a world that treats their suffering differently. It is both more important, culturally speaking, for men to transcend it, and more conceivable that they could. Masculinity is by cultural convention incompatible with victim status, whereas femininity is not. Women in patriarchal society are given little or no sense of entitlement and power, and are thus more likely than most men to feel trapped in the victim position (Cameron 1996-97: 51). We are also reminded that in patriarchal cultures, hierarchies of gender are used to police other hierarchical social relations, for example the use of rape in male prisons. Variations in those who occupy the dominant and subordinate positions in the social/sexual hierarchy can occur without the overall structure being altered. This view fails to take accoiint of the situations in which women do have power (e.g. in many areas of the workplace and over children and vulnerable adults) and the complex ways in which the expression of spiritual, emotional and/or physical pain may be influenced by gender, age, cultural, historical, biological, social and/or religious factors. This leads us to explore Giraud's (1986) work in relationship to the discussion of media representations of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West. In considering the stereotype of crisis in relationship to Myra Hindley, whether Britain in the 1960s can be described as a time of social and cultural disorder, leading to a loss of difference, remains an open question. The social, cultural and economic changes, in the UK, as outlined by Marwick (1998), did not lead to institutional collapse, resulting in the negation of hierarchical and functional differences between people and the development of a cultural sameness that is dull and hideous. Nor is it possible from his work to establish any evidence for a speeding up of the tempo of positive exchanges and an increase in negative reciprocity. In exploring the stereotype of accusation, it is difficult to understand in this context what Girard (1986) means by the obscurity of culture. The ferocity of public reaction to Myra Hindley's crimes was mediated by the press who were keen to exploit a good news story. It may be the case that the moral outrage at her crimes was expressive, in part, of a more profound anxiety at the cultural changes already alluded to and of womanhood in general, gone awry. In terms of collective persecution, Myra Hindley's crimes were directed against one group whom it is criminal to attack-children. It is not possible, more than 30 years after the crimes were committed, to establish whether there was any sexual motivation present in this context. Myra Hindley can be understood as having committed a religious crime in this sense: that having profotmdly offended the (patriarchal) values of the newspaper industry in particular and the public in general, she was in fact offending against God the Father (see Daly 1986). In relationship to the stereotype of the victim, Myra Hindley became a scapegoat, because she was a woman. Ian Brady's relative obscurity, in comparison to Myra Hindley, means that she bears more than her share of public opprobrium for the crimes they committed together. In this context, Myra Hindley has been persecuted for her gender, thus highlighting differences in public and media attitudes towards men and women who murder children. In addition no public explanations have been given to account for the underlying factors which contributed to these crimes being committed and, unlike Mary Bell (see Sereny 1972), Myra Hindley has not produced her own account of the events. In Girard's concept of the scapegoat, although it is not possible in the case of Myra Hindley to establish the stereotype of crisis, it is possible to establish that she fits into the stereotype of accusation and the stereotype of victims. In this case, therefore, she fulfils the demand that two of the three categories apply to her. In this context it is possible to establish that (1) her acts of violence were real, (2) the crisis is real in the sense that she profoundly challenges our notions of womanhood, (3) in becoming a sign of evil, her photograph demands that she must be considered guilty in relationship to her victims, and (4) in her imprisonment she was banished from the community she was believed to 'pollute'. In reflecting on the issues in relation to Rosemary West, the work of Harvey (1990) is pertinent to the stereotype of crisis. Despite the significant political, economic and cultural changes outlined by Harvey (1990), institutional collapse resulting in the negation of hierarchical and functional differences between people and the development of a cultural sameness that is both dull and hideous does not appear to have taken place. Nor is it clear what relationship there is between his arguments and an increase in the negative exchanges characterized by blows, vengeance and neurotic symptoms. It is difficult to establish whether there is increasing opposition between people, an increase in the uniformity of their behaviour and the prevalence of cultural similarity. Nor is it possible to establish whether a cultural crisis exists because of the difficulty in applying this aspect of Girard's (1986) theory to the modern context. In considering the stereotype of accusation, the press appeared disconcerted at the enormity of a disaster that appeared to strike at traditional views of women, their sexuality and family life. This was, in essence, a moral crisis and little attempt was made to understand the underlying factors which contributed to Rosemary West's behaviour in this context. Like Myra Hindley, Rosemary West has not herself provided a plausible account for her actions. In terms of collective persecution, the accusations against Rosemary West made the media suspect that violence was in the air. Her victims were not seen as vulnerable because many of them lived on the margins of society - they were lesbians, runaways, children from the children's home across the road. Rosemary West's persecution was primarily based on her sexual crimes and her violent, debauched sexuality, thereby contravening the strictest social taboos of 'normal' heterosexuality as expressed in marriage. Like Myra Hindley, she can be understood as having committed a religious crime in this sense; that having profoundly offended the (patriarchal) values of the newspaper industry in particular and the public in general, she was in fact offending against God the Father (see Daly 1986). In the stereotype of victims, Rosemary West was persecuted, because of the perception that (1) her femininity had gone awry through her explicit sexuality and debauched sexual orientation; (2) she was an incompetent mother-a sex offender who was unable to protect her children, and (3) her violent sexuality and lesbianism/bisexuality. Like Myra Hindley, Rosemary West became a scapegoat because of her gender; Fred West's (c) The Contmuum Publishing Group Ltd 2004.Storrs 'Our Scapegoat' 23 suicide in prison appears to have absolved him of most of his responsibility in the crimes for which his wife was convicted. In terms of Girard's (1988) typology Rosemary West can be regarded as a scapegoat because although the stereotype of crisis cannot be upheld she certainly fulfils the categories of the stereotype of accusation and the stereotype of victims. It is possible therefore, that in the case of Rosemary West, (1) the acts of violence are real, (2) the crisis is real in the sense that her crimes challenge some of the most deeply held views about women, (3) she was chosen, not for the crimes she was accused of, but for the signs she bore and everything that suggested her guilty relationship, and (4) her imprisonment enabled her to be banished from the community she sought to 'pollute'. Two aspects of the concept of scapegoat which Girard (1986) does not address, are (1) the close cultural association between women and evil in the West, and (2) issues relating to the portrayal of gender and sexual orientation. In exploring a feminist approach to evil Noddings (1989) suggests that: Woman as body, as vessel, has been worshipped, coveted, feared and hated. The sexual passion of man has been explained by the seductive and insatiable desires of woman, and thus everything naturally related to woman has been morally suspect. Not only have we lost the eloquent feminine in moral matters, but also by establishing half the human race as scapegoat we have failed to come to grips with the problem of evil (Noddings 1989: 43). In relationship to Myra Hindley, we have already seen that the work of Birch (1993) supports the above views; she reminds us of the ways in which not only has the frequently reproduced picture of Myra Hindley become divorced from the reality of her as a human being but that her image has become symbolic of the threat of femaleness, let loose from the conventional ties of righteousness, gentleness and nurturance. This means that in Noddings' (1989) terms she is to be both feared and hated. As Birch (1993: 52) suggests, the treacherous, sexually active, bleachblonde femme fatale, so popular in the postwar film noir genre, is both desired by men as well as feared. This reflects a culture defined by men that is split into the unknowable (female) and the knowable (male). Noddings (1989) also refers to the 'sexual passion of man', referring to the male viewer, or consumer of the visual texts; his passion is 'explained by the seductive and insatiable desires of woman' [Myra Hindley] (Noddings 1989: 43), made all the more powerful because of her 'otherness' from him. In linking the image of Myra Hindley to those of the Medusa and the seventeenth-century witches. Birch (1993) reminds us of the long histori- cal gaze of men upon women. Not only do visual images of men not have a comparable imagery or associations for women spectators, but in tbis context, women as spectators or consumers of fhe media image remain largely absent. Newspapers are owned and created by men and for male readers; tbis is partly reflected by tbe 'page three girls' (notice the use of language-girls, not women) in the tabloids. The broadsheets fend fo have features designed specifically for women readers. This supports fhe contention made by Wykes (1998) fbat the media industry is at roof profoundly patriarchal. From the perspective of Rosemary West different issues arise. Thaf 'woman as body, as vessel, bas been worshipped, feared and hated' (Noddings 1989) is, at a profound level, one underlying facfor in the social and sexual conti-ol of women in marriage and the family (Wykes 1998). Man's sexual passion, and its explanation via the seductive and sexual desires of women, is graphically illustrated in the discussion on Rosemary Wesf; any media discussion of fhe dysfunctional or terminal problems associated with male, heterosexual husbandry and fatherhood remained absent. Rosemary West's sexuality was represented as being debauched and ber femininity was described in a disparaging way. She became morally suspect during the course of her trial, in part because of her sexuality, but also because ber victims had negative connotations - they included runaways, hitchhikers, lesbians and children from children's homes. Following her sentence and admission to jail, the tabloid press reported her as having engaged in 'lesbian romps' witb Myra Hindley. In her discussion of the depiction of lesbians on death row, Farr (2000) reflects on the importance of the social construction of gender and media representations of lesbianism; she suggests that these offenders were typically portrayed as manly and man-hafing women, who vent their rage and irrational desire for revenge through killing. This view seems to me, in part, to underscore the discussion of Rosemary West's sexuality and to feed into fhe misogyny and misreporfing at the heart of her trial. Farr's (2000) argument is given further weight by Winter (2002) who compares and contrasts the role of judicial summing up in the trials of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West. She maintains that a critical difference between the two trials was that the case againsf Myra Hindley is sfrongly supported by the evidence and that the evidence against Rosemary West was weak. Winter (2002) maintains thaf a significant factor in the successful prosecution of Rosemary West was the porti-ayal of her gender. The differences in the approaches to gender are most acute in relation to the construction of each woman's role. In Myra Hindley's case, the judge, like the prosecution in the main body of the trial, makes some concessions to her subordination and passivity. The position in the summing up in Rose West's trial is very different. The judge's complete acceptance of the prosecution case (its narrative and sex/gender construction) means that he also endorses the construction of Rose West's dominant role. In emphasizing, exploiting and condemning Rose West's sexuality.. .the judge influences the jury towards conviction. Furthermore, the heavy focus on Rose West's sexuality, the implicit condemnation not only of violent sexuality but also lesbian and bisexual sexuality, and its use to incite prejudice against Rose West shores up the norm of heterosexuality, and thus implicitly the categories of male and female (Winter 2002: 363). The scapegoating of Rosemary West can be seen in the representations of her deviant femininity and sexuality. At a more profound level, it can be seen in the absence of any public discourse that makes problematic white masculinity and male violence as embodied in Fred West. In this context the analytic gaze, and its associated language, is embedded in masculine ideology (Wykes 1998). The result of this is not only to exclude the feminine in moral matters, but also to make problematic the development of a female discourse that is genuinely independent of the dominant ideology (Butler 1993). Applying Girard's (1986) concept of the scapegoat to media representations of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West has been problematic for the following reasons. Although Marwick (1998) and Harvey (1990) outline many significant economic, political and cultural changes that have occurred in Britain and in Western Europe, it is, for example, easier to apply this concept to the Bosnian genocide of 1992-95 or the Rwandan genocide of 1994 than it is to media representations of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West. In spite of the problems outlined above, we have seen that both Myra Hindley and Rosemary West fulfil Girard's (1986) criteria for the stereotype of accusation and the stereotype of victims. This means that they fulfil the requirements set out by Girard because they meet two of the three criteria. However, Girard's (1986) theoretical approach to the concept of the scapegoat is helpful only in part. In this context we need to take account of the complex ways in which gender, sexual orientation and criminal behaviour are socially constructed in a world that is saturated by visual images via local, national and international media institutions. The scapegoating of Myra Hindley and Rosemary West has been communicated in a self-confident and assertive style; this interpretation of their crimes has been communicated in such a way that suggests that all right-minded people can have no other opinion and that this view is self-evident and 'obvious'. This commonsense form of understanding trades off myths and stereotypes which view Myra Hindley as combining something of the Madonna/whore and sexual passion/love imagery; in Rosemary West's case there seems to be a combination of the Madonna/whore imagery with the criminal woman as 'not woman' (Naylor 1995). Jantzen (1998) suggests that the Western symbolic order is underpinned by a patriarchal philosophy of religion and that this is reflected in the principal social/cultural institutions; in a postmodern world media institutions are increasingly significant players in the social, cultural and economic world and remain underpinned by the same symbolic order referred to by Jantzen (1998), In this context this is amply illustrated by Birch (1993), Naylor (1995), Wykes (1998), Farr (2000) and Winter (2002). References Arriens, Jan 2002 'Light from Darkness', The Friends Quarterly, 33 (2): 49-57, Birch, Helen 1993 'If Looks Could Kill: Myra Hindley and the Iconography of Evil', in Helen Birch (ed,). Moving Targets: Women, Murder and Representation (London: Virago Press), Burn, Gordon 1998 Happy Uke Murderers (London: Faber and Faber), 1996-97 'Motives and Meanings', Trouble and Strife, 34: 44-52, Butler, Judith Cameron, Debbie Cameron, Deborah and Elizabeth Frazer New York University Press), Chibnall, Steve 1993 'The Body Politics of Julia Kristeva', in Kelly Oliver (ed,). Ethics, Politics and Difference in Julia Kristeva's Writing (London: Routledge), 1996 'Wanted: The Female Serial Killer', Trouble and Strife, 33: 21-28, 1987 The Lust to Kill: A Feminist Investigation of Sexual Murder (New York: 1977 Law-and-Order News: Reporting in the British Press (London: Tavistock), Daly, Mary 1986 Beyond God the Father: Towards a Philosophy of Women's Liberation (London: Virago Press), Dobash, Rebecca E,, Russell P, Dobash and Lesley Noaks 1995 'Thinking about Gender and Crime', in Rebecca E, Dobash, Russell P, Dobash and Lesley Noaks, Gender and Crime (Cardiff: University of Farr, Kathryn A, 2000 'Defeminizing and Dehumanising Female Murderers: Depictions of Girard, Rene Wales Press), Lesbians on Death Row', Women and Criminal Justice, 11 (1): 49-66, 1986 T7ie Scapegoat (trans, Y, Freccero; Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press), Gorringe, Timothy 1996 God's Just Vengeance: Crime, Violence and the Rhetoric of Salvation, Harvey, David 1990 The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Hoyle, Carolyn, Richard Young and Roderick Hill 2002 Proceed With Caution: An Evaluation ofthe Thames Valley Police Initiative (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). Change (Oxford: Blackwell). in Restorative Cautioning (York: York Publishing Services for the Joseph Rowntree Foundation). Jantzen, Grace M. 1998 Becoming Divine: Towards a Feminist Philosophy of Religion (Manchester: Manchester University Press). Jones, Christopher 2002 'Punishment and Justice' in Jones and Sedgwick 2002: 43-56. Jones, Christopher and Peter Sedgwick (eds.) 2002 The Future of Criminal Justice: Resettlement, Chaplaincy and Community (London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge). 1998 Murder Most Rare: The Female Serial Killer (Westport, CT: Praeger). Kelleher, Michael D. and CL. Kelleher Kent, Sarah 1997 'Rogue's Gallery', Time Out, 1414:16-17. Marwick, Arthur 1998 77je Sixties: Cultural Revolution in Britain, France, Italy and the United States, c. 1958-c. 1974 (Oxford: Oxford University Press). Moore, Sebastian 1997 'Our Scapegoat Myra Hindley', The Tablet, 8208:1531. Nayior, Bronwyn 1995 'Women's Crime and Media Coverage: Making Explanations', in R.E. Dobash, R.P. Dobash and Lesley Noaks, Cender and Crime (Cardiff: University of Wales Press): 77-95. Newell, Tim 2000 Forgiving Justice: A Quaker Vision for Criminal Justice (London: Quaker Home Service). Noddings, Nel 1989 Women and Evil (Berkeley: University of California Press). Sereny, Gitta 1972 77ie Case of Mary Bell (London: Arrow Books). Skrapec, Gandice 1993 'The Female Serial Killer: An Evolving Criminality', in Helen Birch (ed.). Moving Targets: Women, Murder and Representation (London: Walker, John A. 1998 'Marcus Harvey's Sick Disgusting Painting of Myra Hindley: A Winter, Jo Virago Press). Semiotic Analysis', Tate, 14: 56-57. 2002 'The Truth Will Out? The Role of Judicial Advocacy and Gender in Verdict Construction', Social and Legal Studies, 11 (3): 343-67. Wykes, Maggie 1998 'A Family Affair: The British Press, Sex and the Wests', in Cynthia Carter, Gill Branston and Stuart Allen, News, Gender and Power (London: Routledge), NEW_ARTICLEWhen chivalry backfires: Benevolent sexismand attitudes toward Myra HindleyG. Tendayi Viki1*, Kristina Massey1 and Barbara Masser21University of Kent, UK2University of Queensland, AustraliaResearchers have suggested that paternalistic attitudes may influence people'sperceptions of female offenders. In the current study, we examined the role ofbenevolent and hostile sexism in people's perceptions of a specific female offender(Myra Hindley), who can be viewed as having violated traditional gender roleassumptions.We observed that benevolent sexism (but not hostile sexism) was relatedto negative evaluations of Myra Hindley. In addition, mediation analyses suggest that therelationship between benevolent sexism and the negative evaluations of Myra Hindleywas partially accounted for by participants' perceptions that Myra Hindley possessedtraits that violated traditional gender role stereotypes. Theoretical and practicalimplications are discussed.Although it is possible that men and women offend at similar rates, there is generalagreement amongst researchers that women are underrepresented in publishedcrime statistics (Heidensohn, 1991). For example, in 2001, only 19% of the1.6 million known offenders in England and Wales were female (Home OfficeOfficial Statistics, 2003). Given the low reported offending rates of women,researchers have been interested in examining why women are underrepresented inpublished crime statistics. Several commentators have suggested that there are no'real' gender differences in criminal activity, but that female offenders are treatedwith comparative leniency within the criminal justice system (e.g. Curran, 1983;Kapardis & Farrington, 1981; Knuttschitt & Green, 1984; Steffenmeister & Kramer,1983). This apparent leniency is often attributed to chivalry (e.g. Anderson, 1976;Campbell, 1977; Pollak, 1950; Simon, 1975; Swigert & Farrell, 1977). For example,Gelsthorpe and Loucks (1997) interviewed magistrates and found that they viewedfemale offenders more sympathetically and, therefore, were more inclined to helpthem. Such chivalrous responses to female offenders may in part be driven bystereotypical expectations concerning the (comparatively smaller) danger thatfemale offenders pose, and the subsequent perception that they are not worthy ofharsh punishment1 (e.g. Sanderson, Zanna, & Darley, 2000).With regard to the treatment of female offenders, Moulds (1980) differentiatesbetween chivalry (i.e. superficial socially acceptable behaviours) and paternalism(i.e. power relationships between men and women). This distinction is importantbecause paternalism may actually result in female offenders being treated more harshlyby the criminal justice system in some cases (Nagel, 1981; Saulter-Tubbs, 1993). Dowdsand Hedderman (1997) suggest that offences may be gendered in that they are dividedinto male-type (e.g.robbery) and female-type crimes (e.g. shoplifting). Consistent withthis, Daly (1989) found that preferential treatment of women in the criminal justicesystem was limited to those women who had committed 'acceptable', or genderstereotype consistent, types of crimes.Research suggests that those women who commit counter-stereotypical crimesmay, in line with the paternalistic model of criminal justice, be firstly consideredin terms of their psychiatric well-being (e.g. Heidensohn, 1981; Smart, 1977;Wilczynski, 1997). If female offenders who have committed counter-stereotypicalcrimes can be found to be psychiatrically unwell, then this reinforces thepaternalistic need for these women to be cared for-because they are weak orirresponsible-rather than punished. However, if found to be 'bad' rather than'mad', then, under this model this may legitimize the harsher treatment of thesewomen in comparison to male offenders for the same or comparable crimes. Forexample, Johnson, Kennedy, and Shuman (1987) found that amongst a US sample,women were convicted of homicide three times more often than men. As such, itappears that female offenders who commit counter-stereotypical crimes and whosecrime cannot be attributed away to mental health issues are negatively evaluatedand judged as doubly deviant because their crimes counter the female genderstereotype (Heidensohn, 1991).Within recent British history, the case of Myra Hindley provides a good exampleof a woman who committed counter-stereotypical crimes. Myra Hindley wasconvicted in 1966 of the murder of two children and of being an accomplice in athird murder.2 Myra Hindley and her partner, Ian Brady, tortured their victims priorto murdering them (and in the case of 10-year-old Lesley Anne Downey, taperecordedthis torture) and disposed of the bodies by burying them on SaddleworthMoor, near Manchester in the north of England. Myra Hindley was sentenced to lifeimprisonment and despite many campaigns to have her released on parole, as hadbeen recommended after her parole hearings, the public outrage that usually ensueddeterred many British Home Secretaries from doing so (Schone, 2000). It was due tothe strong public opposition to her release that Myra Hindley spent 36 years incustody. She eventually died a prisoner in November 2002.As Birch (1994) notes, Myra Hindley did not even have 'the decency to go mad'(p. 54) and as such she provides an infamous example of a female offender who maybe characterized as bad rather than mad. Myra Hindley's double deviance, incommitting a crime (the murder of children) that constitutes an extreme violation ofthe traditional female stereotype of being nurturing towards children, may explainwhy the British public was so vehemently opposed to her release.Ambivalent sexism and evaluations of womenThe paternalistic model of crime suggests that people's belief in gender stereotypes andsubsequent sexist attitudes may play an important role in the public's evaluation offemale offenders. Although previous researchers have tended to define sexism as hostileattitudes towards women (e.g. Swim, Aikin, Hall, & Hunter, 1995), Glick and Fiske(1996) proposed that hostile sexism (HS) may coexist with subjectively positive sexistattitudes toward women or benevolent sexism (BS). Glick and Fiske describebenevolent sexism as a set of attitudes that favour keeping women in restricted roles,but are subjectively positive in feeling tone. Glick and Fiske developed the AmbivalentSexism Inventory (ASI) which is a 22-item measure that assesses individual levels ofhostile and benevolent sexism (Glick & Fiske, 1996). Using this scale, researchers havefound that benevolent sexism is related to the idealization and positive evaluation ofwomen in traditional gender roles, while hostile sexism is related to the negativeevaluation of women who violate traditional gender roles in particular contexts (e.g. theworkplace and career women; Glick, Deibold, Bailey-Werner, & Zhu, 1997; Masser &Abrams, in press). Thus, Glick and Fiske (2001) suggest that BS and HS can be viewed ascomplementary ideologies that serve to maintain the paternalistic oppression ofwomen.Recent research (e.g. Abrams, Viki, Masser, & Bohner, 2003; Viki & Abrams, 2002)has suggested that BS may have negative, as well as positive, consequences at theindividual (target) level. In a series of studies examining evaluations of rape victims,Abrams et al. found BS to be positively associated with increased blame of theacquaintance rape victim for her assault. Study 3 revealed this relationship to be drivenby benevolent sexists' perception that the acquaintance rape victim had behavedinappropriately. In this context, it appeared that because the victim had violated a keyaspect of how benevolent sexists perceive that women should behave (i.e. in line withtraditional gender roles and in this context in a sexually conservative or submissivemanner; Glick, Lameiras, & Rodriguez Castro, 2002; Viki, Abrams, & Hutchinson, 2003),they were willing to blame her for the assault.Research to date considering the negative effects of benevolent sexism at anindividual level has exclusively focused on benevolent sexists' belief in sexualconservatism for women (e.g. Viki et al., 2003). However, recent research by Forbes,Adams-Curtis, Hamm, and White (2003) has suggested that the traditional femalerole/trait of nurturing children may also be related to BS. In a study examiningperceptions of women who breast-feed, Forbes et al. found BS to be positivelyassociated amongst male participants with evaluations of women who breast-fed(vs. those who bottle-fed), while hostile sexism was unrelated. This suggests that afurther key component of benevolent sexists' gender role norm is for women to benurturing towards children. Drawing on the findings of Abrams et al. (Abrams et al.,2003; see also Viki & Abrams, 2002) and Forbes et al., it could therefore be suggestedthat BS would be associated with the negative evaluation of women who violate thefemale stereotypic role of nurturing behaviour towards children.The current studyIn the current study, we examined whether BS and HS would differentially predictparticipants' evaluations of a female offender (Myra Hindley) who, while mentally well,had in the most extreme way violated the female stereotypic role of nurturing behaviourtowards children. Participants were asked to indicate their level of agreement withBenevolent sexism and Myra Hindley 111positive and negative attitude statements about Myra Hindley, and to indicate the degreeto which each of a series of traits were descriptive of her. Given Myra Hindley's doubledeviance and benevolent sexists' gender role prescription of nurturing behaviourtowards children, it was predicted, in line with previous research (i.e. Abrams et al.,2003; Forbes et al., 2003; Viki & Abrams, 2002), that BS, but not HS, would be relatedto participants' negative evaluation of Myra Hindley. In addition, and in line withAbrams et al., it was hypothesized that the relationship between BS and the negativeevaluation of Myra Hindley would be mediated by the perception that Myra Hindleypossessed traits in violation of the gender stereotype for women.MethodParticipantsOne hundred and twenty three participants (87 females and 36 males)3 from the southeastof England volunteered to participate. Of the participants, 84.6% indicated agesbelow 30 years (mean age 1/4 26:03, SD 1/4 10:70).4 Data were mainly collected on thecollege campus; however, some data were also collected in the city centre and at a trainstation. Participants were approached at the end of lectures/seminars and at varioussitting places and asked if they would complete a series of questionnaires.MeasuresTen items were used to assess participants' attitudes toward Myra Hindley. These itemswere taken from newspaper articles about Myra Hindley in various newspapers at thetime of her death (November, 2002). These items were as follows: 'If justice had beendone, Myra would have been released years ago', 'Myra didn't regret the crimes shecommitted', 'I have no sympathy for Myra', 'Myra was the devil incarnate', 'Myra was acold-blooded murderer', 'Myra was a good person before she met Brady', 'Myra shouldhave been given her freedom', 'I feel sorry for Myra', 'Myra was treated unfairly', and'I hope Myra goes to hell for what she did'. A 9-point scale accompanied all questionsmeasuring attitudes to Myra Hindley (1 1/4 strongly disagree, 9 1/4 strongly agree).Participants were also asked to evaluate Myra Hindley on a series of semantictrait differential scales. These were as follows: Undignified/Dignified, Passive/Aggressive, Ladylike/Unladylike, Sensitive/Insensitive, Stable/Unstable, Bad Tempered/Good Tempered, Affectionate/Cold, Cruel/Kind, Moral/Immoral, Decent/Indecent,Friendly/Unfriendly, Depressed/Cheerful and Peaceful/Violent. These items were on a9-point scale and participants circled the number that represented the extent to whichthey believed Myra Hindley possessed that particular trait.Finally, the ASI was included in the questionnaire. The ASI is a 22-item inventorymeasuring individual levels of ambivalent sexism and it consists of two 11-itemsubscales (Hostile and Benevolent Sexism). The inventory comprises mainly statementsconcerning male-female relationships, to which participants have to indicate their levelof agreement on a 9-point scale (1 1/4 strongly disagree, 9 1/4 strongly agree). Examplesof items are: 'Women seek to gain power by getting control over men (HS) and 'Womenshould be cherished and protected by men' (BS).ProcedureAs already noted, participants were approached at various places and asked if theywould complete our questionnaires. Those individuals who volunteered to participatein our study were left to complete the questionnaires on their own, in private. Initiallyall the participants filled out some basic personal demographic information. Participantsthen read and indicated their agreement with the 10 statements about Myra Hindley(judgment assessment) and estimated the extent they believed Myra Hindley possessedthe 13 traits (trait assessment). Participants also completed the ASI. The order of themeasures was randomized so that some participants completed the ASI beforeanswering different question about Myra Hindley, whereas some participants did theopposite. When the participants had completed the questionnaire, the experimenterreturned to thank, debrief and answer any questions the participants may have hadbefore collecting the completed questionnaires.ResultsPreliminary analysesPrincipal components analysis with a varimax rotation was used to assess the structureof the measure of attitudes toward Myra Hindley. Nine of the 10 items assessing attitudesto Myra Hindley loaded onto two interpretable components (loadings ranged from .57to .87). The remaining item, 'Myra was a good person before she met Brady' loadedequally (at .31) on both factors and was therefore dropped from the factor analysis. Thetwo components that emerged from the factor analysis corresponded to judgments ofMyra Hindley as an evil person (Cronbach's a 1/4 :84) and evaluations of the injustice ofher treatment (Cronbach's a 1/4 :85).5 The evil person measure comprised the followingstatements: 'Myra didn't regret the crimes she committed', 'Myra was the devilincarnate', 'Myra was a cold-blooded murderer', 'I have no sympathy for Myra' and'I hope Myra goes to hell for what she did'; whereas the injustice measure comprised thefollowing statements: 'If justice had been done, Myra would have been released yearsago', 'Myra should have been given her freedom', 'I feel sorry for Myra' and 'Myra wastreated unfairly.'Principal components analysis with a varimax rotation was used to assess thestructure of the trait measure. The 13 items revealed two interpretable components(loadings ranged from .48 to .84). The first of the interpretable components thatemerged from the factor analysis included seven traits focusing on the unpleasant natureof Myra Hindley (Cronbach's a 1/4 :89) and included traits such as immoral, cruel andviolent. The second interpretable component included four traits focusing on theviolation of the female stereotype by Myra Hindley (Cronbach's a 1/4 :71) and includedtraits such as unladylike, insensitive and unfriendly. As the traits of cheerful andundignified failed to load on either of the two interpretable factors and were poorlycorrelated together (a 1/4 :39) they were discarded from further analyses.6 The ASI wasalso tested using a principal components analysis with a varimax rotation. As expected,two components emerged (loading ranges ranged from .46 to .82). Eleven of the itemsloaded on the HS component (Cronbach's a 1/4 :91) and 11 on the BS component(Cronbach's a 1/4 :85).Correlation analysis was then performed and this yielded a significant correlationbetween HS and BS (r 1/4 :53). The magnitude and direction of this correlation isconsistent with that found in previous studies (e.g. Glick et al., 2000; Masser & Abrams,1999). An ANOVA was carried out to test for gender differences in BS and HS. Significantgender differences were obtained only for the HS subscale, Fð1; 121Þ 1/4 16:06, p , :001,with men scoring higher (M 1/4 5:20, SD 1/4 1:43) than women (M 1/4 3:98, SD 1/4 1:58).Scores on the BS scale did not differ significantly by gender, Fð1; 121Þ 1/4 3:20, ns.These findings are in line with previous researchers who have reported similar findings(e.g. Glick & Fiske, 1996; Glick et al., 2000; Masser & Abrams, 1999).Main analysesMean scores and standard deviations for all of the attitude and trait variables can be seenin Table 1. Due to the significant relationships among the predictor variables, multipleregression analyses were performed in order to determine the unique effects of eachpredictor on the dependent variables. BS, HS and participant sex were enteredsimultaneously as predictors of the dependent measures.Myra Hindley as an evil personMultiple regression analyses yielded a significant relationship between BS andevaluations of Myra Hindley as an evil person, b 1/4 :30, t 1/4 2:81, p , :01. Thesefindings indicate that individuals who scored higher on BS were more likely to perceiveMyra Hindley as an evil person. HS was not significantly related to these judgments,b 1/4 2:14, t 1/4 21:22, ns. Similarly, participant sex did not predict judgments of MyraHindley as an evil person, b 1/4 :01, t 1/4 :14, ns.Evaluations of the unjustness of the treatment of Myra HindleyAnalyses revealed a significant negative relationship between BS and the perception ofthe injustice of Myra Hindley's treatment, b 1/4 2:24, t 1/4 22:30, p , :05. This resultsuggests that individuals who scored higher on BS were less likely to view Myra Hindleyas having been unjustly treated. HS and participant sex were not significantly related tothis evaluation (all bs ,.16; all ps ..10).Judgments of Myra Hindley's traitsAnalysis of the unpleasant traits indicated no significant effects of BS, HS or participantsex (all bs ,.14; all ps ..22). Analysis of the violation of female stereotype traitsrevealed a significant relationship between these and BS, b 1/4 :22, t 1/4 2:10, p , :05.This result suggests that individuals who scored higher on BS were more likelyto view Myra Hindley as possessing traits in violation of the female stereotype. HSand participant sex were not significantly related to these traits (all bs ,.17; all ps..09).Mediation analysesIn order to ascertain whether the evaluations of Myra Hindley's character and theunjustness of her treatment by those scoring higher on BS were dependent on theperception of Myra Hindley as possessing traits counter to the female stereotype,mediation analyses (Baron & Kenny, 1986) were performed. Following the previousregression analyses, the evaluations of Myra Hindley as an evil person were regressedonto perceptions of Myra Hindley having violated the feminine norm for behaviour andBS simultaneously. This analysis revealed a significant relationship between violation ofthe gender norm and evaluation of Myra Hindley as an evil person b 1/4 :45, t 1/4 5:40,p , :001, while the relationship between BS and evil person evaluation diminished(t 1/4 2:09, p , :05, see Figure 1). A Sobel test revealed that the reduction in the effect ofBS was significant (z 1/4 1:98, p , :05). The evaluation of injustice in the treatment ofMyra Hindley was regressed onto perceptions of Myra Hindley having violated thefemale norm for behaviour and BS simultaneously. This analysis revealed a significantrelationship between violation of the gender norm and perceptions of injustice,b 1/4 2:33, t 1/4 23:80, p , :001, whereas BS no longer significantly predictedperceptions of the injustice of Myra Hindley's treatment (t 1/4 21:60, ns, see Figure 2).A Sobel test revealed that the reduction in the effect of BS was marginally significant(z 1/4 1:88, p # :06).DiscussionThe results of the current study are consistent with our hypotheses. As expected,BS was related to perceptions of Myra Hindley as an evil person. Specifically, thoseindividuals high (vs. low) in benevolent sexism evaluated Myra Hindley morenegatively and viewed her treatment as less unjust. In addition, mediation analysessuggest that the relationship between BS and the negative evaluations of MyraHindley was partially accounted for by participants' perceptions that Myra Hindleypossessed traits in violation of the female stereotype. Drawing on Forbes et al.(2003), the current study extends the results of Abrams et al. (2003) bydemonstrating that BS can be related to the negative evaluation of a woman whoviolates a non-sexual aspect of the female stereotype for behaviour.This study adds to a growing body of recent literature that has demonstrated theproblem of BS at an individual target level (e.g. Abrams et al., 2003; Viki & Abrams,2002). Early research (e.g. Glick et al., 1997; Masser, 1998) had suggested that BS wasonly related to the positive evaluation of traditional female targets, while HS was key inmotivating negativity toward women who violated traditional gender roles, for examplecareer women. These findings led Glick and Fiske (2001) to conclude BS to be a problemthrough its role as a legitimizing ideology. The findings of the current study add to recentresearch (e.g. Abrams et al., 2003; Viki & Abrams, 2002) by indicating that the problemof BS can lie at the individual as well as ideological level. However, such a suggestionraises the question as to why in the early research in this area (e.g. Glick et al., 1997), BSwas found to be unrelated to negative evaluations of certain types of women, such ascareer women).One possible explanation for this may lie in considering the specificity of targetsused in the studies, and their perceived violation of the beliefs that underpin BS(specifically protective paternalism, complementary gender differentiation, andheterosexual intimacy). In contrast to Glick et al. (1997), who asked participants torespond to a broad subtype label, such as 'career woman', the recent studies that havedocumented the negative effects of BS have presented participants with individualtargets designed, given the structural foundations of BS (Glick & Fiske, 2001), to violatekey aspects of BS norms for appropriate female behaviour. In the context of Glick et al.,it may be that BS was unrelated to the general negative evaluation of career womenbecause inclusion within this category did not automatically preclude a woman fromfulfilling, from a benevolent sexist's point of view, their 'rightful' traditional role. Futureresearch should explore this possibility, and consider under what circumstances BS willbe related to negative evaluations of specific female targets. In the context of careerwomen, it may be that BS would be related to the negative evaluation of a specificwoman if it was perceived that her position prevented her from fulfilling her prescribedrole of being nurturing; for example, a mother who worked full-time and placed herchild in day-care.The failure in the current study of HS to be related to negative evaluations of MyraHindley is also consistent with previous research that considered HS and BS in relationto norm-violating individual targets (e.g. Abrams et al., 2003). As noted previously,Glick et al. (1997) documented a negative relationship between HS and evaluations ofcareer women. In their study, they noted that the sexist men in their qualitativeresponses 'stated that they feared, envied, were intimidated by, or felt competitivetoward' (p. 1330) career women. Thus, it is possible that the relationship between HSand the negative evaluation of non-traditional women is limited to those situationswhere those women provide a direct threat to male authority (e.g. Masser & Abrams, inpress). In the context of the current research, Myra Hindley may have violatedtraditional gender roles, but hostile sexists may not have perceived her behaviour as adirect challenge to male authority. Future researchers should explore this hypothesis.There are a number of limitations to the current study. First, for the purposes of ourstudy, Myra Hindley provided a well-known example of a woman who was doublydeviant in committing a crime that constituted an extreme violation of the traditionalfemale stereotype. However, potentially there may have been something unique aboutMyra Hindley, other than the crimes she committed, that could account for the effectsobserved in the current study. Although from a theoretical perspective this appearsunlikely, future research should look to replicate the effects observed in the currentstudy using a scenario-based approach that portrays the behaviour of Myra Hindleywithout linking it to her name. Such a scenario-based approach would also allow a fullerexploration of the potential link between benevolent sexism and a female offender'sdouble deviance.Specifically, building on the research of Daly (1989) and Wilczynski (1997), it may bethat BS will be linked to polarized responses to female criminals who commit counterstereotypicalcrimes, in comparison to men who have committed the same crimes.Given the same evidence of, or lack of, psychiatric well-being and crimes committed,benevolent sexists may be more likely to cast this type of female offender as mad ratherthan bad, in comparison to a male offender. In cases where there is no doubt that theoffender is psychiatrically healthy, as in the case of Myra Hindley, benevolent sexists mayjudge these female offenders more harshly than male offenders. In short, from theperspective of the benevolent sexist, female offenders who commit counterstereotypicalcrimes may simply be very mad or very bad.Another limitation of the current study that results from the specific focus onMyra Hindley concerns what constitutes a stereotype-inconsistent crime for femaleoffenders. In Myra Hindley's case, her crimes can be viewed as counter-stereotypical inseveral ways. The critical research questions become whether any violent crimecommitted by a woman is counter-stereotypical, whether heinous crimes such asmurder are counter-stereotypical, or whether crimes against children are counterstereotypical.In our case, Myra Hindley's offences fit all three descriptions. As such, it isimportant for future researchers to try and untangle these factors and examine theireffects on the judgments of female offenders.The final limitation to the current study is the omission of a control male offenderwho committed identical crimes while sane.7 The absence of such a control precludesany definitive conclusion from the current study with regard to the influence of sexismwithin the criminal justice system. As such, the research questions addressed in thecurrent paper would benefit from exploration within an experimental design. Such adesign would allow for a more definitive conclusion on the causal nature of the variablesof interest.Despite the noted limitations, the current research makes an important contributionto the research on sexism and the perceptions of female offenders. First, it is the onlystudy to date that has examined the role of BS in the evaluations of female offenders.Second, despite the use of correlational methods, the results of the mediation analysesoffer strong evidence of the psychological mechanism that may underlie public attitudesto female offenders. We demonstrated the relationship of BS to the negative evaluationof a woman who violated a non-sexual gender norm for behaviour. Although MyraHindley's crimes are universally acknowledged as heinous, it appears that those whoendorse BS consider more than her crimes when making their judgments. This studyextends a growing body of literature that suggests that for women who 'do the wrongthing', chivalry may backfire-superficial benevolence towards women may translateinto individual malevolence.ReferencesAbrams, D., Viki, G. T., Masser, B., & Bohner, G. (2003). Perceptions of stranger and acquaintanceand stranger rape: The role of benevolent and hostile sexism in victim blame and rapeproclivity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 111-125.Anderson, E. A. (1976). The 'chivalrous' treatment of the female offender in the arms of thecriminal justice system. Social Problems, XXIII, 349-357.Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in socialpsychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.Birch, H. (1994). Moving targets: Women, murder and representation. Los Angeles: University ofCalifornia Press.Campbell, A. (1977). What makes a girl turn to crime? New Society, 27 January, 1977, 172-173.Daly, K. (1989). Rethinking judicial paternalism: Gender, work-family relations and sentencing.Gender and Society, 3(1), 9-36.Dowds, L. & Hedderman, C. (1997). The sentencing of men and women. Home Office ResearchStudy, 170.Forbes, G. B., Adams-Curtis, L. E., Hamm, N. R., & White, K. B. (2003). Perceptions of the womanwho breastfeeds: The role of erotophobia, sexism, and attitudinal variables. Sex Roles, 49,379-387.7 While Ian Brady (Hindley's partner) may appear to have been an obvious choice for a 'control' male, Brady has beendocumented as suffering severe mental health problems throughout his lifetime, culminating in his transfer to a maximumsecurity hospital in the mid-1980's. Thus his 'sanity' has been drawn into question.G. Tendayi Viki et al. 118Gelsthrope, L. & Loucks, N. (1997). Magistrates' explanations of their sentencing decisions. HomeOffice Research Study, 170.Glick, P., Diebold, J., Bailey-Werner, B., & Zhu, L. (1997). The two faces of Adam: Ambivalentsexism and polarized attitudes toward women. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,23, 1323-1334.Glick, P., & Fiske, S. T. (1996). The ambivalent sexism inventory: Differentiating hostile andbenevolent sexism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 491-512.Glick, P., & Fiske, S. T. (2001). Ambivalent sexism. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimentalsocial psychology, (Vol. 33, pp. 115-188). Thousand Oaks, CA: Academic Press.Glick, P., Fiste, S. T., Mlandinic, A., Saiz, J. L., Abrams, D., Masser, B. et al. (2000). Beyondprejudice as a simple antipathy: Hostile and benevolent sexism across cultures. Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychology, 79, 763-775.Glick, P., Lameiras, M., & Rodriguez Castro, Y. (2002). Education and Catholic religiosity aspredictors of hostile and benevolent sexism towards women and men. Sex Roles, 47, 433-441.Heidensohn, F. M. (1981). Women and the penal system. In S. McConville (Ed.), The uses ofimprisonment. London: Routledge/Kegan Paul.Heidensohn, F. M. (1991).Women as perpetrators and victims of crime: A sociological perspective.British Journal of Psychiatry, 185, 50-54.Home Office Official Statistics (2003). Offenders. Retrieved 18 June, 2003, from http://www.homeoffice.gov.ukJohnson, J., Kennedy, T., & Schuman, G. (1987). Gender differences in sentencing of felonyoffenders. Federal Probation, 31, 66-76.Kapardis, A., & Farrington, D. P. (1981). An experimental study of sentencing by magistrates. Lawand Human Behaviour, 5, 107-121.Knuttschitt, C., & Green, D. (1984). The sex-sanctioning issue: Is it history? American SociologicalReview, 49, 541-551.Masser B. M. (1998). The ambivalent sexism inventory: A social psychological evaluation.Doctoral dissertation, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.Masser, B., & Abrams, D. (1999). Contemporary sexism: The relationships among hostility,benevolence, and neosexism. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 23, 503-517.Masser, B. & Abrams, D. (in press). Reinforcing the glass ceiling: The consequences of hostilesexism for female managerial candidates. Sex Roles.Moulds, E. F. (1980). Chivalry and paternalism: Disparities of treatment in the criminal justicesystem. In F. M. Heidensohn (Ed.), Crime and society. London: Macmillan Education.Nagel, I. (1981). Sex differences in the processing of criminal defendants. In A. Morris &L. Gelsthorpe (Eds.), Women and crime. Cambridge: Cropwood Conference Series No 13.Pollak, O. (1950). The criminality of women. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.Sanderson, C. A., Zanna, A. S., & Darley, J. M. (2000). Making the punishment fit the crime and thecriminal: Attributions of dangerousness as a mediator of liability. Journal of Applied SocialPsychology, 30, 1137-1159.Saulter-Tubbs, C. (1993). Prosecutorial and judicial treatment of female offenders. FederalProbation, 57(2), 37-42.Schone, J. M. (2000). The hardest case of all: Myra Hindley, life sentences, and the rule of law.International Journal of the Sociology of Law, 28, 273-289.Simon, R. J. (1975). Women and crime. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.Smart, C. (1977). Women, crime and criminology. London: Routledge/Kegan Paul.Steffenmeister, D., & Kramer, J. (1983). Sex-based differences in the sentencing of adult criminaldefendants. Sociology and Social Research, 66, 289-304.Swigert, V., & Farrell, R. (1977). Normal homicides and the law. American Sociological Review,XLII, 16-32.Swim, J. K., Aikin, K. J., Hall, W. S., & Hunter, B. A. (1995). Sexism and racism: Old-fashioned andmodern prejudices. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 199-214.Benevolent sexism and Myra Hindley 119Viki, G. T., & Abrams, D. (2002). But she was unfaithful: Benevolent sexism and reactions to rapevictims who violate traditional gender role expectations. Sex Roles, 47, 289-293.Viki, G. T., Abrams, D., & Hutchinson, P. (2003). The 'true' romantic: Benevolent sexism andpaternalistic chivalry. Sex Roles, 49, 533-537.Wilczynski, A. (1997). Mad or bad? Child killers, gender and the courts. British Journal ofCriminology, 37(3), 419-436.Received 20 November 2003; revised version received 8 September 2004G. Tendayi Viki et al. 120NEW_ARTICLETHE TRUTHWILL OUT? THE ROLE OF JUDICIAL ADVOCACY AND GENDER IN VERDICT CONSTRUCTION This article considers the largely neglected role of judicial summing up in contested trials. The rhetoric of the role of the judge is of independent arbiter. Using the trials of Myra Hindley and Rose West the article examines the relationship between this rhetoric and reality in the light of the discretion allowed by the broad nature of the rules 'regulating' the summing up. The article explores how this rhetorical space can be used or exploited so that it becomes a form of judicial advocacy, creating new narratives or lending support to the narratives of the prosecution or defence. In particular, the article argues that a crucial distinction in the narratives evident in the summings up in the trials of Rose West and Myra Hindley is the appearance of the sexed or gendered identities of the two women. INTRODUCTION THE TRADITION of legal positivism provides the basis for the traditional belief that in trials the truth is discoverable and can be elicited when the facts are made known, and reason and the law applied (Nicolson, 1994). The prime arena for this is generally taken to be the jury trial, even though jury trials represent less than 1 percent of all criminal proceedings, as the majority of cases are heard in a magistrates' court or are disposed of by guilty plea (Sanders and Young, 2000: 552). Within this conception of the trial, evidence is presented by witnesses and counsel while the judge presides as independent arbiter performing a 'supervisory' role (Zuckerman, 1989: 54), ensuring that applicable rules and conventions are followed. The judge then informs the jury of the relevant legal rules and requirements and reminds them of the facts: '[the judge's summing up] from an independent standpoint summarises the case, explains the legal issues in contention and may comment on factors which lend weight to or cast doubt on certain evidence' (White, 1985: 85). Finally the jury retires, considers the facts as borne out by the evidence and returns with a verdict. This model of the trial is based on an understanding of the judge and the jury as neutral and value free. Sociolegal research has challenged this perception of the trial process, arguing that the verdict is the culmination of a pre-trial process during which evidence is selected and excluded, and events interpreted and reinterpreted, shaped and reshaped. For example, at the level of police investigation, cases are constructed by the police. Once a prima facie case is established against the accused, evidence is gathered not about him or her but against him or her, with a view to proving the guilt of the suspect, rather than presenting all that is discoverable. If the case progresses to a jury trial, the 'facts', as discovered by the investigation, are mediated by counsel whose sole objective is to win the case. The form of argument, selection of witnesses and evidence is governed, not so much by a wish to discover what is most likely to have happened, but by counsel's need to present a plausible account of events to the jury which makes sense of the evidence in a way that supports their position. The most effective way of doing this is to arrange the account into a narrative (Bennett and Feldman, 1981). Consequently, it can be argued that the version of events and evidence that the jury is presented with is a social construction of reality. This article takes the examination of case construction further. It examines the final stage in the process of construction, the summing up, exploring the nature of the judge's role at this stage. I question whether that role accords with the positivist perception of judge as independent arbiter, through textual analysis of the summings up in the trials of Rose West and Myra Hindley. I explore how the scope for discretion allows the summing up to be used to shore up or undermine the narratives presented to the court, and the role assumed by the judge in ensuring or encouraging conviction in the two cases. I pay particular attention to factors such as the weight of evidence and how the cases were presented by prosecution and defence counsel. This exploration involves an examination of how gender was used as part of the summing up in these two cases, which are unique by virtue of the fact that they provide the only known examples of female serial killers in England for over 100 years. THE FACTS Myra Hindley was tried jointly with Ian Brady and found guilty in 1966 of the murders of Edward Evans and Lesley Ann Downey and as an accessory after the fact in the murder of John Kilbride, for whose murder Ian Brady was found guilty. The evidence was strong. David Smith (Hindley's brother345 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION in law) reported the pair to the police after witnessing the murder of Edward Evans. The body of Edward Evans was subsequently found in Myra Hindley and Ian Brady's home. During the investigation that followed, the police found photographs of Lesley Ann Downey taken in the house and a tape recording of her being stripped naked. The police also found a number of photographs taken on the moors, which were discovered to be the victims' graves. One such photograph was of Myra Hindley crouched on the grave of John Kilbride, whose name was also found in a notebook belonging to Brady. During the trial Ian Brady denied all knowledge of John Kilbride. He also claimed that Lesley Ann Downey had been paid for the photographs and had left the house alive. He protected Hindley, explaining that she was reluctantly involved in the photographing of Lesley Ann Downey and not involved in the killing of Edward Evans. Yet in the face of the evidence, Ian Brady's claims were disbelieved and with the finding of his guilt came Myra Hindley's. Rose West was tried for the murder of 10 girls/young women, allegedly committed with her husband Fred in 1995. The case was based on 10 bodies found in homes inhabited by the Wests. Throughout the investigation Fred West claimed sole responsibility for the murders. He insisted that Rose West had no knowledge of them. Indeed there was no evidence to link her with the bodies, or even some of the victims. Fred West, however, committed suicide before the trial took place and so Rose West became the sole defendant. As a consequence of Fred West's admissions there was a problem in linking Rose West to the deaths of the victims (hereafter referred to as the evidential gap), but also a perceived need to find someone responsible for their deaths. The conviction was achieved, perhaps primarily, on the basis of the evidence of a number of women who testified that they had been sexually abused by Rose West. Before examining in detail the summings up in these cases it is necessary to examine how the form of the law allows the judge considerable discretion in interpreting the facts presented to the court, and how the summing up itself might be said to have a special status within the trial. RHETORIC, RULES AND THE REALITY OF SUMMING UP McBarnet, in her examination of the criminal justice system, explored the apparent gap between the legal positivist conception of the legal process mentioned above, and how it works in practice (McBarnet, 1983). She argued that this gap is not a gap between law as written and law as practised. Rather, it is a gap between the rhetoric of the criminal justice process (the legal positivist conception) on the one hand, and the rules and reality on the other. Much of the time, she argues, the discretionary nature of the rules 'regulating' practice allows actors to deviate from the legal positivist model. This is certainly true of the role of the judge in the summing up. While there are elements of the summing up that the judge is obliged to include (a 'circulartour' around the area of law affected by the case; references to the burden and standard of proof; an explanation of the respective roles of judge and jury; a succinct summary of the facts required to reach a decision; a summary of the evidence; and a statement of inferences the jury are entitled to draw: Lord Hailsham in R v Lawrence [1982]), how s/he communicates and deals with the facts of the case is largely unregulated. The legal positivist conception of the system is reflected in the legal requirement that the judge clearly states the separation of the roles of the jury as the trier of facts and his/her own position as the advisor on the law (Broadhurts v R [1964]). However, as long as the judge clearly articulates 'the disclaimer', s/he is allowed to comment on the evidence.1 S/he may comment strongly on the facts (R v Cohen [1909]), on the evidence that falls outside of the arguments of the defence and prosecution (R v Cohen [1909]), on the reliability of the evidence as long as it is grounded in fact (Cooke [1986]) and on the strength of the defence or prosecution cases (Coulter v R [1926]). The judge can even suggest a suitable verdict. (L Salmon DPP v Stonehouse [1978]). Judicial discretion appears to be regulated by the requirement that the summing up be 'fair'. This requires the review of the evidence to be balanced; and represents equally the cases of the prosecution and defence (R v Mills [1936]). However, while her or his review of the evidence may be balanced, comment on the cases need not be, provided the disclaimer is present. Furthermore, the review of the evidence may be unbalanced in a way not evident in the text alone. For example, the leaning of the judge may be evident from the tone of his or her voice (Blanck et al., 1985). Thus, Robertshaw argues that the disclaimer is largely ineffectual in 'neutralizing' the effect of the judge's comment to the jury, but functions merely as a rhetorical tool (Robertshaw, 1998: 25). Due to the latitude allowed by these rules, successful appeals on the basis of unfair summings up have been examples of unusually overt imbalance. For example, in R v Spencer [1994] the summing up was criticized for being unbalanced and comments were identified as 'one-way', in favour of the prosecution and damaging to the defence. While this conviction was quashed on the basis of the summing up, many other cases illustrating extreme bias have not been. For, as Lord Lowry said, 'all that is required is a general impression of fairness' (Quoted by Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest in McGreevy (1973), emphasis added). Even this standard is not applied stringently. In one case, for example, a judge sighed and muttered 'Oh God' throughout the defence's closing speech. The defence's appeal was refused on the basis that his behaviour did not reflect any view of the defence case, but was just an implicit criticism of the conduct of defence counsel (Hircock [1969]). Thus it appears that, while the law regulating the summing up provides some guiding and limiting framework, it allows great latitude to the judge. Although legal rhetoric represents the judge as independent arbiter, s/he is legally entitled to step into the fray. 347 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION THE SUMMING UP: A POWERFUL DISCOURSE Judges' tendency to arrive at a decision and then to rationalize that decision, manipulating the facts and precedent to fit the desired outcome, has frequently been observed at the level of the upper courts (Frank, 1949: ch. 12; Nicolson, 1995; Bibbings, 2000). This judicial approach may also be observed at trials of first instance during the summing up. Thus it has been argued that the summing up forms a third, largely unacknowledged, limb of advocacy (Robertshaw, 1997). It may follow that the judge adopts methods of argument in the summing up similar in nature to those adopted by counsel. These techniques of argument are based on different perceptions of the process of the jury's understanding of the trial. For example, the jury's comprehension of the evidence is maximized if the evidence and arguments are presented in a narrative format (see below). Within the context of the trial the summing up has special status and can play a crucial role in the jury's decision making.2 Much of the power of the summing up originates from the relative status of judge and jury and the power invested in the speech as a consequence. THE JUDGE AND JURY The jury suffers a number of 'disadvantages' that render it almost wholly dependent on the legal personnel who surround it. The jury's greatest disadvantage is its inexperience of the court system (Ban´kowski and Mungham, 1976; Robertshaw, 1998: 14).3 Not only is the physical environment alien and intimidating, but the members of the jury find themselves extracted from their everyday roles. Throughout the trial the jury members are disempowered, inert; they are merely recipients of information, unable to engage with or exert control over the information they receive (Robertshaw, 1998: 15). The language used in conveying the information, and the instructions accompanying it, compounds this experience. Legal language is a foreign and esoteric language to jurors and unsurprisingly the combination of abstruse vocabulary and complex syntax confuses them (O'Barr, 1982: 27). Further, the mechanics of the court render them childlike as they are ushered from place to place by officials (Sargant and Hill, 1986; Robertshaw, 1998: 12). Thus, the court and trial processes come together to disorientate the jury, to pacify it and create an environment in which it is powerless and dependent on the court personnel. In contrast to the powerlessness of the jury, the most powerful member of the court, the judge, conducts the speech. Compounding the legend of judicial wisdom, the spatial organization of the courtroom confirms the judge's superiority. S/he is physically separated from the rest of the court, is elevated and literally enthroned (Goodrich, 1990: 192; Rock, 1993: 182). The mode in which the judge is addressed bolsters the physically apparent superiority. The judge is addressed with deference and never by name, for exampleas 'the court', 'your honour' or 'the bench'. This appellation not only communicates reverence, but also depersonalizes the judge, transforming her or him into the embodiment of 'law and justice' (Goodrich, 1990: 191). This status means that the words spoken by the judge will receive special attention from observers and listeners, particularly those who are confused by the courtroom and the legal process. The jury, who have been rendered passive by the court process, are at the end of the trial suddenly thrown into action and asked to deliver a verdict, pushed from the margins of the trial to its centre. To compound this move from passivity to activity and empowerment, most jurors are unused to making such important decisions and will be aware of the harsh consequences of a finding of guilt. In these circumstances it is unsurprising that they turn to the judge (in the form of the summing up) for guidance. For example, research by Ban´kowski and Mungham found that 'difficult cases' were identified by jurors as those in which it was not clear from the summing up what the judge thought the outcome should be (Ban´kowski and Mungham, 1976). Judges are sometimes said to explicitly use their authority to influence the jury during the summing up. For example, the judge in the Birmingham Six trial was described as having 'brought all his authority to bear upon the jury' (Walker and Starmer, 1999: 226). Consequently, it has been observed that: '. . . Judges often exert a strong influence on the outcome and are far from being the passive impartial referee as depicted in adversarial theory' (Sanders and Young, 2000: 552).4 Furthermore, the degree of judicial intervention that is allowed in the summing up 'introduces into trials the very problem that the use of juries is meant to avoid - prejudice' (Sanders and Young, 2000: 577). The differing status of the judge and jury and the discretion invested in the judge by the law are arguably some of the most powerful elements of the trial. The summing up not only brings these elements together, but also brings together and mediates all the narratives that have been played out in the trial up to that point. The resulting discourse can be selective and heavily weighted in favour of one side or the other. What little research there is on this topic has shown that there is a strong correlation between the summing up and the trial outcome (Purves and McCabe, 1974; Ban´kowski and Mungham, 1976; Zander and Henderson, 1993: ch. 8). This contributes to infamous miscarriages of justice, such as the Birmingham Six (Sanders and Young, 2000: 575). Arguably, the judge's summing up is 'one of the most powerful agents of injustice . . .' (Sargant and Hill, 1986: 12). SUMMING UP IN THE TRIALS OF ROSEWEST AND MYRA HINDLEY The rest of this article examines the summings up in these two cases. The examination of the texts of the two trials revealed three important forces at work in shaping and directing the summing up, transforming it from the349 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION factual recitation of facts, as described in positivist theory, into a powerful piece of rhetoric. The tools used by the judges in these two cases relate to structure, weighting, and gender construction. STRUCTURE AND WEIGHTING IN SUMMING UP Although bias in a summing up is not necessarily immediately evident it has been argued that it is inevitable: . . . if he arranges the evidence in the order that strikes his mind. The mere effort to see what is essential to a story, in what order the important events happened, and in what relation they stand to each other must of necessity point to a conclusion. (Devlin, 1966: 119) This hidden weighting found in the sequencing and structuring of the speech can be exposed by textural analysis. Robertshaw argues that the structure revealed is like a map: by identifying the starting point a judge can plan how the argument can be structured so that it leads to the desired conclusion (Robertshaw, 1998: ch. 1). This is a powerful tool: 'The mode of presentation to a jury is as likely to influence them just as much as any express comment' (Stephen, 1883: 455). In the trials of Rose West and Myra Hindley two very distinct structures can be observed, which relate roughly to two models that have been used to understand how juries assimilate and interpret evidence. The 'metre model' perceives that juries take on board each fresh piece of evidence and constantly adjust their perception of events accordingly. The 'story or narrative model' perceives that juries look at the evidence as a whole and evaluate it on the basis of how well it fits into an overall narrative (Hastie, 1993). In response to these understandings of juridical reasoning, different methods of advocacy may be adopted. For example, advocates subscribing to the narrative theory will seek to present their evidence within a clear narrative format, whereas the metre model demands that the focus be placed on the quality of each individual piece of evidence. In Myra Hindley's trial the strength of the evidence meant that the task of the judge in supporting the prosecution case through the summing up was straightforward, and thus the structure of the speech prioritized a review of the evidence over the presentation of a single coherent narrative (the metre model). In Rose West's trial, however, the evidence was weaker (Winter, 2001) and so the judge structured the speech in a way that strengthened the prosecution case and pointed to the conclusion of guilt (the narrative model). MYRA HINDLEY In his summation of Brady and Hindley's trial, the judge presented four alternate versions of events, reflecting the stories/narratives presented in the main body of the trial. Consequently, each side was given an equal and fair hearing and the speech was balanced. The speech was divided into five sections: an introduction dealing with the relevant law; asummary of the prosecution case excluding the evidence of the main prosecution witness, David Smith (24 pages);5 a summary of the prosecution case including the evidence of Smith (11 pages); a summary of Brady's defence/ evidence (23 pages); and a summary of Hindley's defence/evidence (9 pages). As a consequence of this structure, each perspective was heard in isolation as far as was practicable, although there was inevitably some overlap. However, despite this apparent fairness the structure was in many ways condemnatory of the accused. For example, the judge's reason for dividing the prosecution evidence was to combat the defence's criticisms of the weakness of a prosecution case based on the unreliable evidence given by David Smith: Mr Hooson [counsel for the defence] has told you again and again that the prosecution case is founded upon Smith, and that a case founded upon Smith can be likened to a house built upon sand. Is he closing his eyes to the situation? (trial transcript: 122)6 The use of rhetorical questions communicated the judge's own view and cast doubt on the defence case (Robertshaw, 1998: 137). By dividing the evidence the judge illustrated that the prosecution's case was not wholly dependent on Smith. In addition, he seemed not to reject David Smith's evidence out of hand, but suggested that he was a credible witness: 'Whatever else might be said against Smith and about him being unprincipled, he was certainly the one who went to the police at ten past six that morning' (trial transcript: 137). Further, a clear distinction was drawn by the judge between Smith and the accused: 'Smith is being attacked for his taste in pornography, but what do you think of a man ten years his senior and a woman of twenty two, who take photographs like that of a little girl' (trial transcript: 111). The judge's distinction between the prosecution and defence cases was also evident in the way in which the testimonial evidence was presented. Smith's evidence was repeated word for word by the judge. Thus, it appeared as a flowing narrative. Furthermore, the judge's introduction to it was as an opening to a story based on facts: 'Then we come to the Saturday the 25th September. That is the fortnight before Evans was killed' (trial transcript: 126). His recounting of Brady and Hindley's testimonies reflected a level of questioning that was absent in relation to David Smith. Their evidence, by contrast, reads like a report with no introduction and typically beginning with the phrases 'It is said that . . .' or 's/he said . . .', thus also indicating their unreliability. Unlike the free-flowing testimony of Smith, Hindley and Brady's evidence was broken up with commentary, rhetorical questions, failures of the defence counsel and hints as to lies told. Thus, while the speech as whole does not read as a complete narrative, sections favourable to the prosecution were presented as narrative. Consequently, the prosecution's evidence, as presented in the summing up, was likely to be more readily comprehended and believed by the jury (Bennett and Feldman, 1981). A second consequence of the adopted structure of the summing up was that the evidence against Ian Brady inevitably tainted Myra Hindley's case. This was despite the judge's statement that 'evidence against Brady . . . is not351 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION evidence against her' (trial transcript: 99). Nonetheless there was a clear attempt by the judge to separate the evidence and to give each case a proportionate time in the summation. It was evident from the judge's introduction what his opinion of the evidence was. Only two paragraphs into the summing up he adopted the phrase 'moors murders'. This indicates that, in spite of his subsequent discussion of how the jury might decide to connect the murders, he had adopted the commonly held view that they were in fact connected. It was also in this introductory section that he warned the jury of the consequences of disagreeing with that conclusion and pressured them into agreeing on a verdict: If . . . you are unable to agree . . . you must come back and say so and then you are discharged, but you appreciate what this means? It means that this whole dreadful case will have to be gone over all over again . . . and that is something we would all greatly wish to avoid . . . I am sure you will all do your utmost to arrive at an agreement one way or the other. (trial transcript: 83)7 It can be seen, therefore, that there was some reliance on structure in the summation in order to secure a guilty verdict. But the judge's main focus was on the evidence. The manner in which the evidence was presented and the commentary that accompanied it clearly displayed his belief in guilt and shored up the prosecution case. The introduction, which outlined the intended structure and explained this approach, provided a strong indication of the tone of the speech: structurally balanced, but heavily weighted in favour of the prosecution version. ROSE WEST The summing up in the trial of Rose West is strikingly different from that in Myra Hindley's trial. The role of structure is far more important. In particular, the review of evidence is structurally unbalanced. The speech is structured as one long narrative or story, which arranges all the events raised in the trial into chronological order. In adopting this approach the judge takes the prosecution story/narrative and slots the defence evidence into the framework provided by the prosecution. Thus, the prosecution version forms the skeleton for the judicial speech and the defence version of events is minimized. Unlike the summing up in Hindley's trial, therefore, the defence evidence does not receive separate attention. The judge, however, stays within the legal framework that governs the summing up. Although the defence case is marginalized, it is not omitted. The summing up is legally sound, because while the summing up must take into account both cases (Perera [1985]), it need not address every point of the defence case or stick to the structure presented by defence counsel (R v Goodway [1994]). As a consequence of using the prosecution case as the framework for the speech it is implicitly accepted and confirmed, whereas the defence case is presented in a form that does not challenge the prosecution's version; rather, it becomes a part of it. Consequently, two different cases pitched against each other, in the classic adversarial fashion, become one story structured in linewith the prosecution narrative. Thus, the structure of the speech has a neutralizing effect. The summing up reconstitutes the defence evidence in such a way that it fails to challenge the validity of the prosecution case. For example, the defence evidence submitted to illustrate that Fred West could and did operate alone becomes merely part of the wider picture presented by the judge. Instead of being evidence that Fred West acted alone and did not rely upon Rose West, the testimony of defence witnesses is interpreted merely as evidence that Fred West also acted alone. Thus the prosecution construction of Rose West's active role is confirmed, whereas the defence construction of her innocence is excluded and denied. Furthermore, within the adopted structure the defence evidence appears in short passages sandwiched between prosecution evidence, cross-examinations or re-examinations. This is particularly evident in relation to testimonies of Fred West's lone attacks. This evidence is minimized, covering only approximately seven and a half pages out of almost 300, and is put into the judge's own, often critical, words. In contrast the prosecution testimonies are recited verbatim. Other defence evidence regarding Fred West's capacity to act alone (taped police interviews) is dealt with in a similar way. The summing up tackles these in only two and a half pages, accompanying the evidence with critical commentary. The prosecution rebuttal evidence (the testimony of Janet Leech)8 in contrast covers five pages. In spite of the danger revealed by the defence's cross-examination of her (which revealed that she lied under oath; denying that she had sold her story to a newspaper) the judge spends considerable time reviewing her evidence. In particular, he highlights sections attesting to Rose West's involvement. This undermines his earlier statement that such evidence is inadmissible as evidence against her, and serves to cast doubt on the reliability of Fred West's 'evidence' (provided in the form of the taped interviews). The judge's support of Janet Leech's evidence is further indicated by his protective attitude to her; for example, explaining why she did not warn the police of Fred West's deceit at interview (she claimed that he had admitted to her that he had lied to the police in interview when claiming that he acted alone). The damage done to the defence by the judge's lengthy review of evidence of Rose West's involvement (according to Janet Leech), albeit inadmissible as such, is then compounded as the judge launches immediately into the testimony of the prison psychiatrist. This testimony is similar in substance and again inadmissible as evidence of Rose West's involvement. What is more, not only is the speech regarding the taped interviews and the rebuttal evidence clearly weighted in favour of the prosecution, but the judge goes on to hint at the injustice done to the prosecution by the rules which exclude such admissions: You may think it very odd that the defence can take into account evidence in favour of Rosemary West but what is said by the same individual on another occasion in other tapes cannot be taken into account against her. You may have thought what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander, but that is not the position. (trial transcript, 20/11/95: 28)353 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION The judge's supportive attitude towards Janet Leech is also evident in relation to other prosecution witnesses, as was the case in the summing up in Myra Hindley's trial. For example, Liz Agius, Caroline Owens, Christopher Davis and Katherine Halliday9 all receive the support of the judge. The failure of the prosecution to bring evidence to substantiate the extent of Caroline Owens' injuries, and the defence's revelation that there was no visible bruising in police photographs, is ignored by the judge in his summation. On the contrary he describes the sentence imposed for Fred and Rose West's attack on her as 'ludicrously low' (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 96). Similarly, inconsistencies or weaknesses in the prosecution witness testimonies are glossed over. For example, when Liz Agius is found to have lied by the defence the judge defends her saying: '. . . you saw her. Was her refusal to tell that which she had told the police officer because of fear that the revelation would destroy her marriage or was the reason something more sinister?' (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 79). The judge also frequently uses the tactic of requesting the jury to recall the prosecution witnesses, thereby humanizing them. For example, 'Ask yourselves, remembering the witness, is this invention, is it fantasy or is it the truth?' (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 63). Such statements, commentary and rhetorical questions embody the assumption that the truth of the testimonies was evident merely from the appearance of the witnesses. This contrasts with the judge's introduction of Rose West's own testimony, which is typically supplemented with commentary such as 'this is Rosemary giving evidence'. Thus, the judge fails to conjure up the image of Rose West in the witness box as he does with prosecution witnesses. Furthermore, he distances himself from her evidence confirming that it is 'her evidence', implying it is not accepted by him. The attribution of names and faces to prosecution witnesses is coupled with the inclusion of prosecution witness statements that confirm their honesty, such as: '. . . the things that I have told this court are the truth' (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 63). Other methods are used. For example, the fine detail described by one prosecution witness is recounted in the judge's review of his evidence, again indicating his reliability: 'There were two cups of coffee made . . . his being the smallest, one sugar, no milk' (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 107). The overall effect is that the prosecution witnesses receive the judge's support throughout the summing up, whereas both Fred and Rose West are attacked for their unreliability: 'Of course whether in any particular instance Rosemary West has told lies is for you to say . . . she has not admitted to telling any lies, but suppose you were to find that she had lied to other people . . . or had lied to you? What are you to make of that?' (trial transcript, 20/11/95: 33). The judge's attack on the defence case through the structure of the summing up is strong but subtle. A more overt attack is made through the heavy use of destructive and damaging comment. During the closing speech the defence noted the gap between the evidence and a conclusion of guilt, which they argue, the prosecution filled with an attack on Rose West's character and femininity:He (the prosecution counsel) has tried to take you from one part of the case to the other, one half of the evidence to the other, to forge the link, and he is a bit like . . . a mountain guide, and he comes along to you and he says 'I will lead you to the path to the top of this mountain and if you follow me we will get to the top together. If we get to the top together you convict Rosemary West'. Unfortunately what happens when Mr Leveson is leading you along that path is that you come to a break in the path, a gap in the path, a void in the path. What he does and what he has done is that he has jumped over the void, and then he is turning round to you from the other side and he is saying to you 'jump, it's quite safe; jump'. (trial transcript, 15/11/95: 65-6) Through his summing up the judge denies and disguises that gap: denying it by simply refusing to acknowledge it and disguising it through the structure he develops. It is also evident, however, that like the prosecution the judge fills the gap with attacks on the character of Rose West based on her sex/gender. GENDER CONSTRUCTION IN SUMMING UP While much contemporary legal feminist scholarship has examined the construction of gendered identities in law, more recent feminist work has also sought to examine the perception and construction of the sexed body (Smart, 1990). This new branch of feminist theory rejects the earlier Anglo-American legal feminist presumption that the body is pre-existing or natural, and unaffected by social practice and cultural interpretation. Drawing, for example, on the work of Butler (1999) this new brand of legal feminism argues that the body is not 'brute nor passive, but . . . interwoven with and causative of systems of meaning, signification and representation' (Murphy, 1996: 61). This suggests that linguistic (Ingaray, 1985) and social practices shape the meanings attributed to the female body and how it is perceived in opposition to the male body (Wingrove, 1999). By examining the way in which the binary construction of male and female is constituted through language or culture the very notion of sexual difference is challenged. By challenging this difference, the social meanings attributed to that difference are also challenged. For example, the meaning of rape in western society is shaped by the understanding of the 'phallic' penis, which is imbued with meanings of power over the passive submissive vagina (Smart, 1996). These perceptions or constructions become entwined with understandings of gender, so that femaleness is inseparable from passive femininity. Yet examinations of the construction of the sexed body have revealed, for example, that understandings of the penis in rape as phallic and powerful are not universal, but are culturally specific (Helliwell, 2000). Legal discourse participates in this construction of sexual difference, producing fixed notions of the sexed body. This discourse and law's disciplining of the body defines the 'normal' body through the definition of normal sexual practice: heterosexuality (Collier, 1997). Heterosexual practice supports the bifurcation of the sexes (Butler, 1999), and law, by355 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION supporting heterosexuality as the norm, also produces the discursive categories of the male and female sexed body. An analysis of legal discourse reveals not only support for the heterosexual norm, but also the meanings attributed to the sexed body. For example, the requirement of only 'honest belief in consent' in the law of rape allows space for the fulfilment of 'normal', masculine, heterosexual desire (Duncan, 1995). In the present context it is legal discourse in the courtroom that is of interest. It is evident that the dialogue in the trials of Rose West and Myra Hindley maintained the distinction of male and female by problematizing atypical female behaviour. In the summing up, the wide discretion allowed by the rules regulating the speech created space for judicial rhetoric in which norms could be set up and deviancies identified and condemned (Nicolson, 2000: 3). An analysis of the discursive constructions of sex and gender trials of Rose West and Myra Hindley reveals significant differences in the judges' summings up. In the trial of Hindley the judge was more willing to understand and explain her actions within the confines of the feminine or female. Thus, she was portrayed to some extent as passive and subject to Brady's demands. In the trial of Rose West, however, the judge not only relied upon, and exploited more heavily, notions of bad womanhood, but also adopted a position regarding Rose West's sexuality which denied her femininity. The use of stereotypes of good and bad womanhood in advocacy are well documented. In particular, the bifurcation of women into 'wives and whores' (Reiner, 1997) is a recognized, effective technique of advocacy: [I] learned very quickly, like every other lawyer . . . that the nearer I could get to painting my client as a paragon of traditional womanhood, the more likely she was to experience the quality of mercy. (Kennedy, 1993: 33; see also Temkin, 2000) Alternatively a woman successfully portrayed by the prosecution as an 'antimother', as sexually predatory or as domineering is unlikely to receive such mercy, only the wrath of the criminal justice system (Nadel, 1995; Nicolson, 1995; Keenan, 2000). It is evident from the present study that these techniques can be used in judicial summing up, just as they are in the presentation of cases by lawyers. In Rose West's case the use of constructions of gendered sexuality were used by the judge to endorse and compound the attack on her character by the prosecution in the main body of the trial. This construction of sexuality helped bridge the evidential gap, making possible actions that otherwise would be perceived impossible for a woman. The total acceptance of the prosecution constructions was exacerbated by the structure of the speech that confirmed the prosecution case. The Myra Hindley summing up, however, did not dwell on sexuality, and the judge's approach to the evidence was more balanced. MYRA HINDLEY The most notable feature of the summation in Myra Hindley's trial is the judge's failure to engage in or emulate the explicitconstruction of sexuality presented by the prosecution, which portrayed Hindley as sexually aggressive. Throughout the main body of the trial Hindley's relationships were all sexualized by the prosecution, regardless of whether or not they were sexual in nature. For example, the prosecution sexualized her friendship with her young neighbour Pat Hodges, describing it as giving her 'a kick', 'certain enjoyment' and 'morbid satisfaction' (trial transcript: 101). This construction was not evident in the judge's summing up, nor were Hindley's relationships with the victims sexualized during the summing up. Beyond the undeniable fact that the victims were subject to sexual abuse, Myra Hindley's sexuality is not commented upon beyond the judge noting that she was Brady's 'mistress'. This is perhaps because the evidence in the trial was strong, and so resort to these attacks was not deemed necessary. Myra Hindley's motives lay not in her perverse sexuality, but in her (feminine) devotion to Brady. Rather than endorsing the prosecution's construction of Hindley's sexuality, the judge referred to the traditional binary construction of male and female. That is not to say, however, that gendered norms were absent from the summing up. They were raised implicitly due to the nature of the prosecution evidence which illustrated her involvement in the killing and sexual assault of three children/young people. The evidence against her was strong and the judge inevitably concedes her involvement: You have seen the pictures and heard that Hindley's fingerprints were on them, which shows that she has seen the pictures. She heard the tape and allowed it to be kept. She was with Brady when the suitcases were taken to the station, and you have heard that her prayer book was used for the concealment of the ticket. (trial transcript: 159) However, he appears to struggle with the gender issues raised by this evidence: accepting the prosecution's construction of Myra Hindley would also mean accepting a deviation from feminine norms of a type perhaps unknown in the 1960s. Thus, the judge seems to settle for constructing her behaviour as, at worst, that of an accomplice. This is evident even in the above quotation where he concedes her involvement. During the description her involvement is notably secondary: she saw the pictures, she allowed them to be kept, she was with Brady. Although in strict legal terms she is not regarded as a mere accomplice (except in the murder of John Kilbride) in the judge's interpretation of her involvement she does not bear full responsibility. His review of the evidence does not shy away from her involvement; for example, he describes Brady as dependent on her for transport and as present during Edward Evans' violent murder (trial transcript: 136, 96). But it is clear from the nature of this evidence that the judge perceives her role to be supplier of tools,10 provider of transport and observer. His presentation of Myra Hindley's role as handmaiden is facilitated by the general assumption that she was the subordinate party in the relationship and, indeed, in the commission of the crimes, something that was conceded to some extent even by the prosecution. On the one hand it is their relationship that condemns357 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION her: 'Nobody has suggested that he had anyone whom he would have shared such an operation with other than the accused Hindley' (trial transcript: 156). But this is also responsible for her partial mitigation. Thus, the judge dwelled at length on her total dependence on and trust of Brady: 'She maintains that attitude, that she was devoted to Ian, and was only concerned in protecting him' (trial transcript: 161). The focus on this evidence and other indicators in the trial imply that the judge accepts the prosecution's suggestion of her involvement: ([T]he prosecution say) she was in with him on everything, and that she was as bad as him. She was the essential car driver . . . and in the Downey and Evans cases clearly she was an active and willing participant . . . in the Kilbride case she must have known exactly where she was. (trial transcript: 157) He also accepts the defence's construction of her subordination.11 However, in constructing her accomplice role it is also necessary that he undermines her femininity. Thus, although the judge does not employ the powerful construction of deviant sexuality offered by the prosecution, his summing up is nonetheless damning of Hindley's femininity. As a consequence of both the evidence and the nature of gendered roles at that time that strongly associated women with caring and motherhood (Wilson, 1980), Hindley's femininity was inevitably undermined by the nature of the crimes she was involved in. Crimes committed against children jarred with norms of maternity, especially through her role in the torture of Lesley Ann Downey: . . . she had to look out of the window because she could not bear to watch what was going on; does that not make her as bad as the man, and that there was nothing to choose between them in the way they were treating the child? (trial transcript: 112) Yet, the summing up was conducted in a low emotional key; whereas the prosecution fully exploited the 'natural' association of femininity and maternity, the judge did not. This is most evident in his refusal to make use of the most damaging evidence (the tape recording of Lesley Anne Downey). If it was her voice the next question is going to be - what were you doing to that child to produce those results? Was she a reluctant woman, and so embarrassed that she had to look out of the window and all the rest of it? (trial transcript: 114, emphasis added) While the judge is dismissive of Hindley's explanation of her involvement and uses rhetorical questions to damn the defence's version of events, his refusal to remark on the particular horror of the recording and Hindley's unfeminine, unmaternal behaviour renders the summing up account very different from the prosecution's exploitation of that evidence. This response to the tape recording reflects the overall attitude of the judge in the summing up which may be broadly described as focused on the evidence rather than as utilizing emotive or gender discourses. In contrast to the summing up in the trial of Rose West, Myra Hindley retains some degree of femininity. The judge does not exploit evidence pertaining to her sexuality which might undermine the motion of her female sexed body. It may even be said that it is his perception and description of her as female that leads him to accept her complicity. The judge appears to believe that her conviction will be secured by the evidence brought by the prosecution, and he does not seek to embellish or further construct her role. ROSE WEST In contrast, as in the main bodies of the trials, recourse to gendered subjectivities in the summing up of Rose West's trial is prolific. In her trial there is an almost complete acceptance of prosecution versions of sexuality and maternity. The judge adopts the prosecution tactic of using images of deviancy to encourage the jury to convict. This type of character evidence, which falls outside the scope of the formal definition of character evidence, has been described as 'moral prejudice' (Childs, 2000b). Thus, the summing up gradually and progressively defeminizes Rose West. Her female, maternal body is little by little revealed to be perverse, abnormal and inverted. The judge initially concedes defence evidence regarding her teenage affinity with children, even Fred West's children. This, however, is one of the only concessions the summing up makes to the defence's construction of Rose West's femininity. Halfway into the first day of the summing up (the summing up lasted over two days in total) the defeminization of Rose West through the themes of maternity and sexuality has commenced. The previous defence portrayal of her normal and caring relationship is undermined as the judge quotes the prosecution submissions that she beat Charmaine West (her stepdaughter and the first of her victims) and allowed Fred West to have sex with Anne Marie Davies (also her stepdaughter and an important prosecution witness). At the same time the construction of her deviant sexuality begins: The prosecution say Anne Marie gives powerful support to the submission they make that Rosemary and Frederick West were together involved in the sexual abuse of young women, and that is quite regardless of any sexual escapades, adventures, misdemeanours or crimes that Frederick may have been involved with at other times. (trial transcript: 61) This quote embodies a pattern that is integral to the summing up. Throughout the summing up the judge focuses almost entirely on the prosecution evidence of Rose West's role while minimizing the defence's evidence of Fred West's role (see below). While this is explicable because it is now Rose West who is on trial, the minimization of his role brings her to the fore in scenarios where, had they been tried together, her participation would have been regarded differently, perhaps as accomplice. Joint or individual abuse by Rose West is always referred to as sexual abuse, whereas Fred West's record of rape and abuse is played down and dismissed as escapades, adventures or misdemeanours, and perhaps, as an afterthought, a crime. 359 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION This representation of events reconstructs Rose's otherwise female body outside of the binary positioning of heterosexuality. Within the descriptions of the abuse of the victims Rose is presented in the male or masculine role, and the very fact of the abuse undermines any notions of maternity that might otherwise be assumed. Through this representation the possibility of female otherness, which is constructed through the performance of heterosexual sex (Duncan, 1995; Butler, 1999), is negatived by both her active role in her same-sex abuse of the victims and in her apparent domination of Fred West. The attack on her maternity is fourfold. First, the judge discusses evidence of the unjustified physical abuse of her stepchildren, and indifference to their well-being is mentioned.12 Second, the judge expresses clear disapproval of her behaviour as a mother: . . . what on earth was Anne Marie doing there (in a pub) at 12 and a half? . . . They had drinks and she remembers that she had barley wine . . . I think that comes in small bottles and is very strong. (trial transcript, 17/11/95: 59) Third, the judge notes her exploitation of female identity and maternity to lure victims: 'She (Miss A) said Rose made her feel as though she, Rose, really cared about her and gave her food and drink' (trial transcript, 17/11/95: 34). And finally, despite warning against accepting Fred West's interviews as evidence against Rose West, the judge uses them to expose her as the antithesis of 'motherhood', recounting how Fred West blamed Rose West for removing Shirley Robinson's unborn baby from her womb after death.13 There is a similar demonization of Rose West through the construction of deviant, aggressive and promiscuous sexuality. The summing up is woven with condemnation of her in spite of several statements indicating that her sexuality is not an issue on which judgements regarding guilt or innocence should be based: 'Involved in that is no condemnation of someone who has lesbian tendencies' (trial transcript, 17/11/95: 31). Despite these statements there is ample comment on Rose West's sexuality. Examples were heavily cited in the judge's speech. Her open sexuality is noted: 'She knocked on the door and Rosemary answered. Rosemary was only dressed in a bra and pants' (trial transcript, 17/11/95: 35, see also 36). In addition, the judge is careful to note her open and dominant sexuality: 'She was at pains to stress that Rose West was the dominant partner in their lovemaking and that she made love aggressively' (trial transcript, 20/11/95: 5). As the construction culminates, towards the end of the summing up it is also noted that she was a prostitute, a lesbian or bisexual, that she (rather than she and Fred West) possessed a collection of 'dildos, rubber underwear, pornographic videos, a rice flail, and a whip and a suitcase which contained a quantity of leather straps and buckles' (trial transcript, 20/11/95: 9). Having reviewed the mass of sexual evidence submitted by the prosecution the judge states that:I am not troubling you . . . with all the evidence concerning the goings on at 25 Cromwell Street . . . You are not here to pass moral judgement and I pass over, therefore, the relationships between Rosemary West and the various men, including Mr Dobbs, who sought solace from Rosemary at a time of marital difficulty. (trial transcript, 20/11/95: 11) Within this statement Rose West's promiscuity is both noted and criticized while, as throughout the summing up, those with whom she acted are shielded from criticism. She is, through the lengthy review of prosecution evidence, particularly that of Katherine Halliday, which covers seven pages, 'revealed' to be a sexual 'vamp', who has inverted norms of feminine/female passivity which are borne out in the performance of heterosexual sex. Yet having devoted considerable time and attention to Rose West's sexuality the judge concludes: You have heard of certain sexual practices indulged in by Rosemary West. That evidence was admitted . . . to refute any suggestion that only a man would have an interest in sexually abusing young women. In the event that evidence might not have been necessary because Rosemary West has never disputed her interest in young women. (trial transcript, 20/11/95: 29) The evidence regarding both Rose West's sexuality and maternity is, in most instances, simply a regurgitation of the prosecution case. While a review of the prosecution evidence is one of the key purposes of the summing up, it is the disproportionate attention it is awarded, the weight it is afforded, and the structure within which it is recounted that are the problematic elements of the judge's approach. Because of all these elements, the summing up is biased toward the prosecution case. Although Rose West does not deny her sexual deviancy, only most of the instances of abuse reported in the trial, she seeks to excuse or explain it through her relationship with Fred West and her own sexual victimization. However, the judge casts doubt on these claims. For example, while acknowledging that Rose West claimed to have suffered two rapes at a young age he also notes that they were unreported and hence her evidence is unreliable. While the judge does not suggest that she is lying, as there is no hard evidence to support or refute her claim, he does suggest that she may be mistaken. Second, the judge makes it clear that her evidence is distinguished from evidence that he accepts: 'She told you that Frederick West promised her the world, to love her and care for her and she fell for it. I am reminding you of her evidence now . . .' (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 20). The judge sandwiches Rose West's evidence between phrases that emphasize that it is merely 'her story' ('She told you' and 'I am reminding you of her evidence now'), indicating that he does not accept it. In doing so the judge raises doubts and discrepancies about the defence evidence.14 This contrasts with the prosecution evidence which runs in long narrative passages. This defence evidence as to her victimization and passivity is restricted to the beginning of the summing up. It appears that such evidence is included361 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION only as background to the offences that are described in the later stages and which come to dominate the summing up. Likewise, suggestions of her lack of agency are confined to the opening sections of the summing up: Please bear in mind that at this time Rosemary West was only 17, I think . . . (Rose said) by way of excuse or explanation that she was very young at the time. (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 40, emphasis added) As with other themes featuring in the summing up, these initial concessions to the defence case are then abandoned as the speech progresses and the prosecution constructions become the core of the narrative. It is that narrative which will be freshest in the juror's minds. During this dominant narrative the judge focuses on the prosecution's construction of Rose West's sexually active role and quotes, verbatim, huge portions of various prosecution witness's evidence. Consequently he implicitly not only rejects the defence's dual construction of passivity and innocence, but excludes it too and instead focuses on her active participation in sexual abuse. This is particularly the case in his so-called 'summary' of the testimony of Miss A which covers over 20 pages. During this 'summary' the judge focuses continually on Rose West's participation to the exclusion of Fred West who was present throughout and who in fact raped Miss A. This is also true of the evidence of Miss X, Anne Marie Davies and Katherine Halliday. As the summary of the evidence is in essence a reproduction of the prosecution case, the pattern of the accompanying minimization of Fred West's role also features in the speech. For example, the repetition of descriptions of acts attributed to Rose West emphasize her role; the judge repeats several times that it was her who provided the tape for binding up Miss A (trial transcript 17/11/95: 39). It is, however, the minimization of Fred West's abusive behaviour that is most acute. Defence evidence of his solo sexual offending which supports the view that Rose West was either uninvolved or passive, and thus contradicts or undermines the prosecution construction of her as the leading partner in the abuse, receives scant attention from the judge. Victims' stories of his attacks are covered in short paragraphs, omitting the detail and drama included in prosecution accounts of joint attacks or sexual relations. The murders Fred West is known to have carried out alone receive minimal attention and the defence victims who gave evidence that they were attacked by Fred West acting alone are abstracted as their backgrounds, personalities and lives are omitted from the speech, unlike those of the prosecution victims. When the evidence of defence witnesses is included it is accompanied by dismissive remarks such as: 'She told you, perhaps over dramatically, that until that moment she had not known what fear was' (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 21, emphasis added). Fred West's acts are mitigated and he is noted to apologize: '. . . he started crying and said he was sorry' (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 91, 20). Doubt is also cast on his identity, thereby reducing the value of these defence testimonies: 'This would not be a positive identification upon which any jurywould be able to convict Frederick West . . .' (trial transcript, 16/11/95: 22). The comment that accompanies the review of the defence evidence and its minimization mean that Fred West appears only fleetingly in the summary of witnesses' accounts of sexual relations and abuse15 and as a shadowy figure located firmly in the background. This downplaying of Fred West's role seriously undermines the defence case which relies on his role as a key element of their case. Rose West is placed squarely in the spotlight and portrayed as equal, sexually dominant and perverse, and dominant in the killings. This is a very different approach from that taken by the judge in Myra Hindley's trial. CONCLUSION The judges' approaches in the two cases confirm and expound the basic underlying differences in the main body of each trial: that the case against Myra Hindley was strongly supported by the evidence, and that the case against Rose West was evidentially weak. I have argued that although each judge makes clear his belief in the guilt of each woman, the differing levels of evidential strength in the trials result in the adoption of very different modes to communicate this and that these ultimately amount to a form of judicial advocacy. The approach of each judge seems to incorporate the methods deemed necessary to achieve a conviction. I have identified three elements of particular significance: weighting, structure and gender stereotypes. Weighting is heavily employed in both cases. In Myra Hindley's trial, this reflects the strength of the prosecution evidence, while in Rose West's case it aims to obscure the lack of strength of the prosecution evidence. Structure, though less important in Myra Hindley's trial, is still significant: the judge's summary of the prosecution case, both with and without David Smith's evidence, illustrates the strength of the prosecution case, and shields it from the defence's argument that David Smith's interest in conviction (both because his version of events rendered him less culpable, and because he had contracted to sell his story to The Sun in case of Ian Brady and Myra Hindley's conviction) rendered his evidence unreliable. This more common summing up structure (Pattenden, 1990: 178) is, however, abandoned by the judge in Rose West's case for one that supports very strongly the prosecution narrative, structure and case construction. Thus the defence case is implicitly undermined, and the challenge presented by the defence evidence is minimized and neutralized. Again, the different structures are a response to the differing degrees of available evidence. In the absence of strong evidence the judge in Rose West's trial abandons a structure that would allow a metre approach to juridical reasoning and adopts the narrative approach which strengthens the prosecution case. Finally, there is the inclusion and exploitation of categories of sex and gender in the speeches. In the summing up of the trial of Myra Hindley there is little appeal to emotive discourse based on gendered ideals, perhaps363 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION reflecting not only the stronger available evidence, but indicating that there may have been less awareness of the utility of this type of stereotyping in the 1960s. In contrast, the summing up of Rose West's trial incorporates the emotive and gendered discourse employed by the prosecution, particularly in relation to sexuality. The differences in the approaches to gender are most acute in relation to the construction of each woman's role. In Myra Hindley's case, the judge, like the prosecution in the main body of the trial, makes some concession to her subordination and passivity. The position in the summing up in Rose West's trial is very different. The judge's complete acceptance of the prosecution case (its narrative and sex/gender constructions) means that he also endorses its construction of Rose West's dominant role. In emphasizing, exploiting and condemning Rose West's sexuality I would argue that the judge influences the jury toward conviction. Furthermore, the heavy focus on Rose West's sexuality, the implicit condemnation of not only violent sexuality but also lesbian or bisexual sexuality, and its use to incite prejudice against Rose West shores up the norm of heterosexuality, and thus implicitly the categories of male and female. In turn Rose West is represented as not a woman at all. The judge's approach to the summing up in Rose West's trial implicitly confirms the gap in the evidence. The comparison of two trials, one where the evidence was weak and the other where it was strong, reveals the summation techniques employed by the judge in the former case to overcome the problem of the evidentiary weaknesses. If the evidence was strong why would such extreme measures be assumed in the speech? In the light of this proposition, what is perhaps most significant is that the actions of the judge in Rose West's case were not contrary to the law 'regulating' the summing up. To employ the language of Packer, a crime control approach is adopted by the judge in this (and many other) summings up (for a critical discussion see Sanders and Young, 2000: ch. 1). As McBarnet shows in relation to the criminal process in general, this reflects a gap between positivist rhetoric and legal rules, rather than between rules and reality (McBarnet, 1983). However, if, as McBarnet argues, what legal actors (in this case, judges) do is not determined by the law as a consequence of its highly discretionary nature in some areas, the question that arises is what does structure what they do. I have argued that some of the most important structuring elements are stereotypical understandings of gender and sexuality. This should not be surprising given the work that has been done by postmodern feminism to expose the role of discourse in actively shaping identity and subjectivity (Brophy and Smart, 1985; Smart, 1989, 1997; Gunew, 1990; Naffine, 1990; Butler, 1999) and in particular, work conducted by various feminist criminologists which has revealed how gendered norms can be exploited in the courtroom to achieve desired results (Nicolson, 1995; Bell and Fox, 1996; Ballinger, 2000). What might be more surprising is how little attention has been given to this in relation to the summing up. The summing up provides a written and powerful record of the content of the trial and its key 'facts', facts which are then endorsed or rejected by thejury. As such it could perhaps be described as the embodiment of 'law's truth' (law's version of what took place; Jackson, 1992). Yet the summing up fails to tell us 'what happened'; rather when the evidence is at its weakest, as it is in the trial of Rose West, the 'facts' are presented in their most manipulated form. That manipulated version may also embody a very particular notion of femininity and, perhaps more importantly for the women defendants, what will become an enduring and authoritative record of their actions as women. NOTES I would like to thank Lois Bibbings, Marie Fox and Andrew Sanders for their comments on earlier versions of this article, and the anonymous reviewers of Social & Legal Studies. 1. Mitchell [1960], R v Middlesex JJ ex parte DPP [1952], Beeby [1911], all ruled that the comments can be made by the judge in forceful terms provided the role of the jury as trier of facts is not usurped. 2. The considerable amount of research conducted to understand how and why juries reach decisions provides an insight into the decision-making process. However, such research has been severely limited by the rules that protect the jury from scrutiny (Contempt of Court Act 1981, s. 8). Studies have, therefore, been conducted using mock juries and mock trials. The limitations attached to this approach are abundant (LSE Project, 1973; see also Baldwin and McConville, 1979), but such research does cast light on an otherwise invisible process. Many studies have confirmed that the role of the judge and the summing up can be crucial in shaping jury decisions. 3. The jury is in the position of people such as small claims litigants or witnesses, described by Gallanter as 'one-shot players'. Court regulars such as lawyers and judges, described as 'repeat players', have a great advantage due to their experience (Gallanter, 1974). 4. However, it should be noted that judicial influence in proceedings is not limited to the summing up, but can be evidenced, for example, by judicial intervention during the main body of the trial (Jackson and Doran, 1995: ch. 5). 5. David Smith was Myra Hindley's brother-in-law. He was present for the final murder, that of Edward Evans, and reported it to the police. 6. Although there are many examples and quotes that could be included in the text for the purposes of brevity I have chosen just a few in each case to illustrate the point being made. 7. This contrasts with Lees' finding in rape trials that the problems dangers associated with retrials are rarely explained to jurors, perhaps because judges' tendency in rape trials is toward acquittal (Lees, 1997: ch. 3) 8. Janet Leech accompanied Fred during his police interviews as an 'appropriate adult' and later developed a friendship with him. During her testimony she claimed that Fred had confessed to her that Rose had instigated the murders and that he was lying to the police to protect her. 9. Liz Agius testified that she was drugged and subsequently abused by Rose and Fred. The Wests were convicted in the 1970s of indecently assaulting Caroline Owens. She testified in the instant trial that she was also raped by them. Christopher Davies, the Wests' son-in-law, testified that he heard screamingWINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION during the night at Cromwell Street. Katherine Halliday had a consensual sexual relationship with Rose for several months, but her testimony 'constructed' the relationship so that she appeared in the trial as a further victim of the Wests. 10. Guns found in the house were registered in Hindley's name; Brady having a criminal record was excluded from holding a gun licence. 11. However, although the judge accepts Myra's role as handmaiden, it is a role that is clearly distinguished from that played by David Smith in the murder of Evans. At the beginning of the summing up the judge distinguishes innocent involvement and accessorial liability. 12. 'She (Anne Marie) spoke of another occasion when Charmaine was tied to the bed, she could not say why' (trial transcript, 17/11/95: 43) and 'Mrs Dix recalls her saying "I am not bothered whether she (Heather) is dead or alive, she has made her bed and she must lie in it" ' (trial transcript, 17/11/95: 111). 13. Trial transcript, 17/11/95: 96. 14. This is similar to the approach of judges observed in the research conducted by Sargant and Hill, in which the prosecution were observed to '. . . play down the discrepancies in the prosecution evidence and play up the weaknesses of the defence (Sargant and Hill, 1986: 12). Similarly, the judge in the Birmingham Six case divided the summing up into chapters, drawing conclusions at the end of each section and making damning comments on the defence case (Walker and Starmer, 1999: 226). 15. There is some discussion of his police interviews. However, the way in which this is presented, with the focus on the prosecution selected interviews, serves only to strengthen the prosecution construction of Rose's active role. CASES CITED Beeby [1911] 6 Cr App R 138 Broadhurts v R [1964] AC 457 Cooke [1986] 84 Cr App R 286 Coulter v R [1926] 29 WALR 40 DPP v Stonehouse [1978] AC 55 Hircock [1969] 1 All ER 47 McGreevy [1973] 57 Cr App R 424 Mitchell [1960] Crim LR 211 Perera [1985] 16 A Crim R 292 [Qld CCA] R v Cohen [1909] 2 Cr App R 197 R v Goodway 98 Cr App R [1994] 11, 14, CA R v Lawrence [1982] AC 510, 519, HL R v Middlesex JJ ex parte DPP [1952] 2 QB 758 R v Mills [1936] 25 Cr App R 138 R v Spencer (The Times 13 July 1994) REFERENCES Baldwin, J. and M. McConville (1979) Jury Trials. Oxford: Clarendon. Ballinger, A. (2000) Dead Woman Walking: Executed Women in England and Wales 1900-1955. Aldershot: Ashgate. Bell, C. and M. Fox (1996) 'Telling Stories of Women Who Kill', Social & Legal Studies, 5: 471. 365Bennett, W. and M. Feldman (1981) Reconstructing Reality in the Courtroom. London: Tavistock. Bibbings, L. (2000) 'Boys Will Be Boys: Masculinity and Offences against the Person', in D. Nicolson and L. Bibbings (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Criminal Law. London: Cavendish. Blanck, D., R. Rosenthal and La Doris Hazzard Cordell (1985) 'The Appearance of Justice: Judges' Verbal and Non-verbal Behaviour in Criminal Jury Trials', Stanford Law Review 38: 89. Brophy, J. and C. Smart (eds) (1985) Women In Law: Explorations in Law, Family and Sexuality. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Butler, J. (1999) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge. Childs, M. (2000a) 'Commercial Sex and the Criminal Law', in D. Nicolson and L. Bibbings (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Criminal Law. London: Cavendish. Childs, M. (2000b) 'The Character of the Accused', in M. Childs and L. Ellison (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Evidence. London: Cavendish. Collier, R. (1997) 'After Dunblane: Crime, Corporeality, and the (Hetero)sexing of Bodies of Men', Journal of Law and Society 24: 177-98. Collier, R. (1998) Masculinities, Crime, and Criminology. London: Sage. Devlin, P. (1966) Trial By Jury. London: Oxford University Press. Duncan, S. (1995) 'Law's Sexual Discipline: Visibility, Violence and Consent', Journal of Law and Society 22: 236. Frank, J. (1949) Law and the Modern Mind. New York: Stevens. Gallanter (1974) 'Why the "Haves" Come Out Ahead: Speculations on the Limits of Legal Change', Law and Society Review 9: 95-160. Goodrich, P. (1990) Languages of Law: From Logics of Memory to Nomadic Masks. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. Gunew, S. (1990) Feminist Knowledge: Critique and Construct. London: Routledge. Hastie, R. (ed.) (1993) Inside the Juror. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Helliwell, C. (2000) 'It's Only a Penis: Rape, Feminism and Difference', Signs 25: 789. Ingaray, L. (1985) Speculum of the Other Woman, trans. C. Gilligan. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. Jackson, J. (1992) 'Law's Truth, Lay Truth and Lawyer's Truth: The Representation of Evidence in Adversary Trials', Law and Critique 3: 29. Jackson, J. and S. Doran (1995) Judge without Jury. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Keenan, C. (2000) 'The Same Old Story: Examining Women's Involvement in the Initial Stages of the Criminal Justice System', in D. Nicolson and L. Bibbings (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Criminal Law. London: Cavendish. Kennedy, H. (1993) Eve Was Framed: Women and British Justice. London: Vintage. Lees, S. (1997) Ruling Passions: Sexual Violence, Reputation and the Law. Buckingham: Open University Press. LSE Project (1973) 'Juries and the Rules of Evidence', Criminal Law Review 221. McBarnet, D. (1983) Conviction. London: Macmillan. Mungham, S. and Z. Ban´kowski (1976) 'The Jury in the Legal System', in P. Carlen (ed.) The Sociology of Law. Keele: University of Keele. Murphy, T. (1996) 'Bursting Binary Bubbles: Law, Literature and the Sexed Body', in J. Morison and C. Bell (eds) Tall Stories: Reading Law and Literature. Alder- Nadel, J. (1995) Sara Thornton: The Story of a Woman who Killed. London: Victor shot: Dartmouth. Gollancz. Naffine, N. (1987) Female Crime: The Construction of Women in Criminology. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.367 WINTER: VERDICT CONSTRUCTION Naffine, N. (1990) Law and the Sexes: Explorations in Feminist Jurisprudence. Sydney: Allen & Unwin. Nicolson, D. (1994) 'Truth, Reason and Justice: Epistemology and Politics in Evidence Discourse', Modern Law Review 726. Nicholson, D. (1995) 'Telling Tales: Gender Discrimination, Gender Construction and Battered Women who Kill', Feminist Legal Studies 3: 185. Nicolson, D. (2000) 'Criminal Law and Feminism', in D. Nicolson and L. Bibbings (eds) Feminist Perspectives on Criminal Law. London: Cavendish. O'Barr, W. (1982) Linguistic Evidence: Language, Power and Strategy in the Courtroom. New York: Academic Press. Pattenden, R. (1990) Judicial Discretion and Criminal Litigation. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Purves, S. and R. McCabe (1974) The Shadow Jury at Work. Oxford University Penal Research Unit: Basil Blackwell. Reiner, R. (1997) 'Policing and the Police', in M. Maguire, R. Morgan and R. Reiner Oxford Handbook of Criminology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Robertshaw, P. (1997) 'The Catalyst of Liberal Reform: The Risks of Puncture Repair at Speed', International Journal for the Semiotics of Law 80. Robertshaw, P. (1998) Summary Justice: Judges Address Juries. London: Cassel. Rock, P. (1993) The Social World of an English Crown Court. London: Clarendon. Sanders, A. and R. Young (2000) Criminal Justice. London: Butterworths. Sargant, T. and P. Hill (1986) Criminal Trials: The Search for Truth. Fabian Research Series no. 348. Smart, C. (1989) Feminism and the Power of Law. London: Routledge. Smart, C. (1990) 'Law's Power, the Sexed Body and Feminist Discourse', Journal of Law and Society 17: 194. Smart, C. (1996) 'Collusion, Collaboration and Confession: On Moving Beyond the Heterosexuality Debate', in D. Richardson (ed.) Theorising Heterosexuality: Telling it Straight. Buckingham: Open University Press. Smart, C. (1997) Women, Crime and Criminology. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Stephen, J. F. (1883) History of the Criminal Law of England, vol. I. London. Temkin, J. (2000) 'Prosecuting and Defending Rape: Perspectives from the Bar', Journal of Law and Society 219-48. Walker, C. and K. Starmer (1999) Miscarriages of Justice: A Review of Justice in Error. London: Blackstone. White, R. (1985) The Administration of Justice. New York: Basil Blackwell. Wilson, E. (1980) Only Halfway to Paradise: Women in Postwar Britain 1945-1968. London: Tavistock. Wingrove, E. (1999) 'Interpellating Sex', SIGNS 24: 869. Winter, J. (2001) An Investigation into the Use of Gender in Case Construction in the Trials of Rose West and Myra Hindley (unpublished). Zander, M. and P. Henderson (1993) Crown Court Study. Research Study no. 19, Royal Commission on Criminal Justice. London: HMSO. Zuckerman, A. (1989) Principles of Criminal Evidence. Oxford: Clarendon.